1
Multimodal Spatial Reasoning in the Large Model
Era: A Survey and Benchmarks
†Xu Zheng1,2, †Zihao Dongfang1, ∗Lutao Jiang1, ∗Boyuan Zheng1, ∗Yulong Guo1, Zhenquan Zhang4, Giuliano
Albanese2, Runyi Yang2, Mengjiao Ma2, Zixin Zhang1, Chenfei Liao1,5, Dingcheng Zhen8, Yuanhuiyi Lyu1,
Yuqian Fu2, Bin Ren6,7, Linfeng Zhang5, Danda Paudel2, Nicu Sebe7, Luc Van Gool2, ‡Xuming Hu1,3
1HKUST(GZ)
2INSAIT, Sofia University “St. Kliment Ohridski”
3HKUST
4South China University of Technology
5Shanghai Jiao Tong University
6University of Pisa
7University of Trento
8Independent
† Co-first Author; ∗Core Contributors; ‡ Corresponding Author.
Fig. 1:
(a) Various multimodal inputs for advanced spatial reasoning with MLLMs, such as 2D images [1], 3D scenes [2]
and videos [3]. (b) Downstream tasks base or rely on spatial reasoning, such as VLA [4], 3D layout generation [5], and
vision-language action [6].
Abstract—Humans possess spatial reasoning abilities that en-
able them to understand spaces through multimodal observations,
such as vision and sound. Large multimodal reasoning models
extend these abilities by learning to perceive and reason, showing
promising performance across diverse spatial tasks. However, sys-
tematic reviews and publicly available benchmarks for these mod-
els remain limited. In this survey, we provide a comprehensive
review of multimodal spatial reasoning tasks with large models,
categorizing recent progress in multimodal large language models
(MLLMs) and introducing open benchmarks for evaluation. We
begin by outlining general spatial reasoning, focusing on post-
training techniques, explainability, and architecture. Beyond clas-
sical 2D tasks, we examine spatial relationship reasoning, scene
and layout understanding, as well as visual question answering
and grounding in 3D space. We also review advances in embodied
AI, including vision-language navigation and action models.
Additionally, we consider emerging modalities such as audio and
egocentric video, which contribute to novel spatial understanding
through new sensors. We believe this survey establishes a solid
foundation and offers insights into the growing field of multi-
modal spatial reasoning. Updated information about this survey,
codes and implementation of the open benchmarks can be found
at https://github.com/zhengxuJosh/Awesome-Spatial-Reasoning.
Index Terms—Spatial Reasoning, Multimodal Large Language
Model, Survey, Benchmark
I. INTRODUCTION
A. Background
Spatial reasoning is a fundamental human ability that allows
individuals to understand and interact with the world through
multimodal inputs, such as vision, sound, and other senses.
It supports navigation, comprehension of object relationships,
and problem-solving in spatial contexts, as shown in Figure 1.
While large language models (LLMs) have made significant
strides in text processing and generation [55], their spatial
reasoning is limited by their primarily unimodal design [56].
Integrating multimodal information—such as images, audio,
and video—into language models offers new opportunities to
enhance spatial reasoning, particularly for tasks requiring deep
understanding of complex real-world scenarios [57–63].
Large multimodal reasoning models have emerged as a
promising solution, as they are trained to perceive and rea-
son across multiple modalities simultaneously [64–68]. These
models have shown remarkable performance in a wide range
of spatial tasks, from understanding 2D spatial relationships to
more complex 3D reasoning. However, despite these advance-
ments, there remains a notable gap in systematically reviewing
arXiv:2510.25760v2  [cs.CV]  2 Nov 2025


2
Multimodal Spatial Reasoning
General MLLM
Test-Time Scaling
Prompt Engineering
Spatial-MM [7], VSI-Bench [8], VoT [9], etc
Tool Use
SpatialScore [10], SpatialPIN [11], etc
Others
VisuoThink [12], Logic-RAG [13], etc
Post-Training
SFT
Multi-SpatialMLLM [14], SpatialVLM [15], etc
RL
Video-R1 [16], Spatial-R1 [? ], etc
Model Design
Spatial-MLLM [17], SpatialRGPT [18], Spatial-ORMLLM [19], etc
Explainability
Beyond Semantics [20], ADAPTVIS [21], RelatiViT [22], etc
3D Vision
3D Visual Grounding
3D Input
LLM-Grounder [23], Grounded 3D-LLM [24], etc
Multi-view Input
VLM-Grounder [25], 3DAxisPrompt [2], etc
Hybrid of 3D and 2D
SeeGround [26], ReasonGrounder [27], etc
3D Scene Reasoning and QA
Training-required
LLaVA-3D [28], 3DGraphLLM [29], etc
Training-free
SpatialPIN [11], Agent3D-Zero [30], etc
3D Generation
3D Layout Generation
LayoutGPT [5], Layout-your-3D [31], etc
3DGen as Program
3D-GPT [32], CAD-Recode [33], etc
Embodied AI
Vision-Language Navigation
Scene Understanding
Spartun3D [34], GSA-VLN [35], etc
Intention Interpretation
AutoSpatial [36], LL3DA [37], etc
Planning & Navigation
NavVLM [38], NavCoT [39], etc
Embodied Question Answering
OpenEQA [40], EMBOSR [41], etc
Embodied Grasping
ThinkGrasp [42], FreeGrasp [43], etc
Vision-Language Action
3D-VLA [44], π0.5[45], Chat-VLA2 [46], etc
Embodied World Model
TesserAct [47], EVA [48], etc
Novel Modalities
Video-based
VideoLLaMA2 [49], VideoINSTA [50], Video-R1 [16], SpaceR [3], etc
Audio-based
STARSS23 [51], SpatialSoundQA [52], ACORN [53], SAVVY [54], etc
Fig. 2: Taxonomy for multimodal spatial reasoning with large models.
and evaluating the performance of these emerging models,
especially in the context of multimodal spatial reasoning.
B. Contributions
This survey aims to fill that gap by providing a comprehen-
sive review of the current state of multimodal spatial reasoning
with large models, as shown in Figure 2. We begin by
reviewing the general landscape of spatial reasoning, focusing
on key aspects such as post-training techniques [15, 16], model
explainability [20], and architecture design [18]. Moving be-
yond traditional 2D tasks [10], we delve into more advanced
forms of spatial reasoning, including spatial relationship rea-
soning [39], scene and layout understanding [5], and ground-
ing visual information in 3D space [27]. Furthermore, this
paper also explores the intersection of spatial reasoning and
embodied AI tasks [40], including vision-language navigation
and action models [44], where models are required to perform
tasks in dynamic environments based on multimodal inputs.
We extend the discussion to incorporate the use of emerging
modalities such as audio and ego-centric video, which offer
distinct opportunities for spatial understanding, particularly in
novel sensor environments [69, 70]. In addition to reviewing
the existing literature, we introduce open benchmarks for eval-
uating the performance of MLLMs in spatial reasoning tasks.
These benchmarks aim to standardize the evaluation of these
models and provide a reliable foundation for future research.
The introduction of these benchmarks will also facilitate
comparisons across different models and drive advancements
in the field by offering standardized testing protocols.
We believe this survey serves as an essential resource
for researchers and practitioners in the field of multimodal
spatial reasoning, establishing a solid foundation for future
work in this critical area. Additionally, we provide access
to the codes, implementations, and up-to-date information
about the open benchmarks at https://github.com/zhengxuJosh/
Awesome-Spatial-Reasnoning, which can help further advance


3
TABLE I: Recent related survey papers on Reasoning in MLLMs.
Authors
Venue/Date
Main Focus/Analysis
Link
Zhou et al. [71]
Arxiv 2025 (May)
RL-based reasoning
link
Wang et al. [72]
Arxiv 2025 (Apr)
Explores small reasoning models, training, inference, and applications
link
Ke et al. [73]
Arxiv 2025 (Apr)
Discusses inference scaling, learning-to-reason, and agentic systems in LLMs
link
Zha et al. [56]
Arxiv 2025 (Apr)
Focuses on enabling LLMs with 3D spatial reasoning capabilities
link
Bi et al. [74]
Arxiv 2025 (Apr)
Reviews advancements in multimodal reasoning in LLMs
link
Chen et al. [75]
Arxiv 2025 (Apr)
Investigates scaling challenges and techniques in LLM reasoning
link
Chen et al. [76]
Arxiv 2025 (Apr)
Discusses long chain-of-thought approaches for enhancing LLM reasoning
link
Ali et al. [77]
Arxiv 2025 (Mar)
Focuses on mathematical reasoning and optimization tasks within LLMs
link
Wang et al. [78]
Arxiv 2025 (Mar)
Reviews efficient reasoning techniques for large-scale LLMs
link
Plaat et al. [79]
Arxiv 2025 (Mar)
Explores efficient inference techniques for large reasoning models
link
Qu et al. [80]
Arxiv 2025 (Mar)
Discusses language and multimodal techniques for efficient reasoning in LLMs
link
Lin et al. [81]
Arxiv 2025 (Mar)
Focuses on transitioning from language reasoning to multimodal reasoning
link
Sui et al. [82]
Arxiv 2025 (Mar)
Reviews techniques for reducing inefficiencies in LLM reasoning
link
Wang et al. [83]
Arxiv 2025 (Mar)
Examines the integration of chain-of-thought reasoning with multimodal LLMs
link
Bandyopadhyay et al. [84]
Arxiv 2025 (Mar)
Discusses various reasoning strategies implemented in LLMs
link
Li et al. [85]
Arxiv 2025 (Mar)
Focuses on methods to improve causal reasoning abilities in LLMs
link
Yan et al. [86]
Arxiv 2025 (Feb)
Reviews mathematical reasoning benchmarks and methods in LLMs
link
Yang et al. [87]
Arxiv 2025 (Feb)
Explores code-enhanced reasoning in LLMs, and reasoning-driven code tasks
link
Li et al. [88]
Arxiv 2025 (Feb)
Focuses on cognitive reasoning models and LLMs (System 1 vs System 2)
link
Cheng et al. [89]
Arxiv 2025 (Feb)
Discusses integrating logical reasoning in LLMs for more structured outputs
link
Srivastava et al. [90]
Arxiv 2025 (Feb)
Investigates small language models’ reasoning abilities and improvements
link
Xu et al. [91]
Arxiv 2025 (Jan)
Focuses on reinforced reasoning techniques for LLMs
link
Wang et al. [92]
Arxiv 2024 (Jan)
Explores the emerging trends and challenges in multimodal reasoning for LLMs
link
Ours
Arxiv 2025 (Aug)
Multimodal spatial reasoning in the large model era
link
research in this domain. Through this work, we aim to
provide valuable insights into the current challenges and
future opportunities in multimodal spatial reasoning with large
models, encouraging further exploration and development in
this rapidly evolving field.
C. Related Works
Significant progress has integrated vision, audio, and other
modalities with text models, enabling richer spatial reasoning
in 2D and 3D. Prior surveys examine related directions but
leave gaps relevant to multimodal spatial tasks. For example,
Wang et al. [72] study small reasoning models but focus
on unimodal, low-complexity tasks; Ke et al. [73] analyze
inference scaling and agentic systems without deeply ad-
dressing multimodal spatial reasoning; and Zha et al. [56]
emphasize 3D capabilities but concentrate on implementation
details rather than cross-modal evaluation. Broad reviews such
as Bi et al. [74] summarize multimodal advances but do not
propose systematic benchmarks or evaluation frameworks for
spatial understanding in dynamic, real-world settings.
Our survey fills this gap by concentrating on multimodal
spatial reasoning in the large-model era. We categorize
spatial tasks (e.g., relationship reasoning, scene understanding,
3D visual grounding), incorporate emerging modalities (audio,
egocentric video), and present open benchmarks and evalua-
tion protocols absent from prior work. This focused review
aims to provide a concise foundation for advancing research
and practical evaluation in multimodal spatial reasoning.
II. PROBLEM SETUP: MULTIMODAL SPATIAL REASONING
Definition. Multimodal spatial reasoning aims to infer
spatial relations, locations, and actions from heterogeneous
inputs and to produce verifiable outputs grounded in space.
Formally, given inputs X = {ximg, xvid, xpc, xaud, xtext, . . .}
(e.g., RGB images, videos, point clouds, audio, and language)
under a specified reference frame (2D/3D/ego/allo), a model
predicts Y such as (i) textual answers/rationales, (ii) geomet-
ric quantities (boxes, poses, trajectories), or (iii) executable
actions/plans for embodied settings. This unifies classic VQA-
style queries, 3D grounding, navigation, and layout/scene
generation [18, 34, 36, 93, 94].
A. Types of Spatial Reasoning in MLLMs
Spatial reasoning in MLLMs spans basic localization to ad-
vanced scene modeling. Key types include: ①Localization &


4
Category
Details
Types
1. Localization: Locate objects in 2D/3D.
2. Relation: Reason about spatial relations.
3. Navigation: Plan paths and optimize actions.
4. Pattern: Detect patterns/symmetries.
5. Scaling: Resize while preserving proportions.
6. Transformation: Apply spatial changes.
7. Context: Interpret positions in context.
8. 3D Generation: Synthesize 3D scenes.
9. Modeling: Build scene models for predictions.
10. Interaction: Support real-time spatial interaction.
Eval
1. Multimodal Integration: Test modality combinations.
2. Task Coverage: VQA, 3D localization, navigation.
3. Transparency: Trace decisions with maps or probes.
4. Generalization: Test adaptability in new environments.
5. Embodied Testing: Measure real-time performance.
6. Benchmarking: Provide reproducible tasks.
Roadmap
1. 2D Tasks: Spatial reasoning in images/videos.
2. 3D Reasoning: Grounding, QA, navigation.
3. Embodied Reasoning: Navigation and world models.
4. Novel Modalities: Cross-domain spatial reasoning.
TABLE II: Overview of Spatial Reasoning in MLLMs: Types,
Evaluation Protocols, and Roadmap
Memory: Locate objects in 2D/3D relative to others/observer
and track their states over time. ②Relation & Geometry:
Reason about spatial relations (above/below/left/right) and
metrics (distance, angle, area, volume). ③Navigation & Prob-
lem Solving: Plan paths and optimize actions (e.g., shortest
routes, spatial puzzles). ④Pattern & Perspective: Detect pat-
terns/symmetries and reason across viewpoints. ⑤Scaling &
Resizing: Model size changes while preserving proportions. ⑥
Transformation: Apply rotation, translation, and scaling while
maintaining relationships. ⑦Contextualization: Interpret posi-
tions under environmental context (e.g., room vs. spacecraft).
⑧3D Model Generation: Synthesize 3D shapes/scenes from
spatial cues. ⑨Environmental Modeling: Build scene/world
models for prediction and decision making. ⑩Sensing &
Interaction: Support real-time spatial interaction (e.g., AR)
via sensors/vision. These abilities underpin applications from
navigation to simulation and interactive systems.
B. Evaluation Protocols for Spatial Reasoning
Evaluating MLLMs’ spatial reasoning should probe ac-
curacy, robustness, interpretability, and generalization. Key
dimensions: ①Multimodal Integration: Test diverse modal-
ity combos (images, text, audio, depth/point clouds, sen-
sors) to assess cross-modal fusion beyond unimodal cues.
②Task Coverage: Include VQA, 3D localization, map-based
navigation, embodied planning, and scene/image generation
to span low- and high-level reasoning. ③Process Trans-
parency: Trace decisions via attention maps, intermediate
states, or rationale probes to reveal how spatial relations
are encoded/manipulated. ④Generalization & Robustness:
Evaluate out-of-distribution settings (novel layouts, unseen
environments, perturbations) to test adaptability. ⑤Interac-
tive/Embodied Testing: Measure real-time performance for
navigation/manipulation and AR/VR, including responsiveness
and online updates. ⑥Benchmark Standardization: Provide
Image
Video
3D
…
Modality
Encoder
Text
Tokenizer
Audio
Connector
Large Language Models
Test-Time 
Scaling
Explainability
Post Training
Fig. 3: Typical MLLM architecture and strategies.
reproducible suites spanning controlled synthetic tasks and
real-world scenarios. Addressing these facets enables compre-
hensive, comparable assessment of MLLMs’ spatial reasoning
and clarifies strengths/weaknesses across applications.
Roadmap. We next instantiate this setup across application
strata: (1) general 2D image/video tasks with MLLMs, (2)
3D spatial reasoning (grounding, QA, navigation), and (2)
embodied spatial reasoning (VLN, VLA, world model), and
(3) novel modalities & cross-domain settings. Each section
maps back to the taxonomy above and adopts the evaluation
dimensions outlined here.
III. GENERAL MULTIMODAL SPATIAL REASONING
General multimodal spatial reasoning refers to MLLMs’
ability to understand and reason about spatial relationships
across visual and textual inputs. It encompasses tasks such as
visual question answering (VQA) on spatial relations, object
localization, perspective understanding, 3D comprehension,
and navigation. These tasks require aligning visual perception
with linguistic expressions of spatial concepts like “above,”
“behind,” and “to the left of.” As shown in Figure 3, current re-
search enhances spatial reasoning in multimodal models along
four main directions: ①Test-time scaling to boost inference-
time capability; ②Post-training methods such as supervised
fine-tuning and reinforcement learning on spatial datasets; ③
Architectural improvements for richer spatial encoding; and ④
Explainability studies to reveal limitations and failure modes
in spatial reasoning.
A. Test-Time Scaling Methods
Test-time scaling methods offer training-free strategies to
enhance MLLMs’ spatial reasoning during inference. Instead
of retraining or fine-tuning, these approaches leverage im-
proved prompting, tool-assisted reasoning, and external modal-
ity integration. Existing works can be broadly grouped into
three categories based on their methodological focus.


5
TABLE III: Comparison of prompt engineering methods for
multimodal spatial reasoning. We summarize key ideas and
prompt types of representative approaches.
Method
Prompt Type
Key Idea / Mechanism
TopViewRS [95]
Textual
Uses simple top-view templates as
baseline prompts for spatial reason-
ing.
VSI-Bench [8]
Textual (graph-structured) Guides models to build and use
cognitive graphs for spatial dis-
tance reasoning.
OmniSpatial [96]
Textual (CoT)
Applies Chain-of-Thought reason-
ing to spatial VQA tasks.
SCABenchmark [97]
Textual (structured cues) Adds coordinates and reference
frames to improve spatial under-
standing.
Spatial-MM [7]
Visual
Uses bounding boxes or scene
graphs to enhance spatial reasoning
accuracy.
Mind’s Eye (VoT) [9]
Visual / Hybrid
Visualizes reasoning steps as spa-
tial traces to aid understanding.
SpatialPIN [11]
Progressive
Decomposes
complex
spatial
queries into multi-stage sub-tasks.
SpatialPrompt [98]
Quantitative / Textual
Establishes
spatial
anchors
for
stepwise geometric reasoning.
SpatialMind [99]
Structured / Multi-modal Integrates
scene
representations
with task-specific reasoning plans.
1) Prompt Engineering: Prompt engineering is the most
direct and lightweight approach to enhance spatial reasoning in
MLLMs without external tools or fine-tuning. Recent work ex-
plores how carefully crafted prompts can better elicit models’
latent spatial reasoning abilities. Although Chain-of-Thought
(CoT) prompting has achieved notable success in general
reasoning, its direct application to spatial tasks yields limited
gains. To address this, researchers have proposed specialized
prompting strategies tailored for spatial understanding, as
shown in Table III.
Early methods, such as TopViewRS [95], introduce sim-
ple templates but show only marginal improvements. VSI-
Bench [8] demonstrates that explicitly instructing MLLMs
to build cognitive graphs enhances spatial question an-
swering, whereas standard CoT fails. Similarly, OmniSpa-
tial [96] finds textual CoT ineffective for complex perspective-
taking. SCABenchmark [97] further analyzes prompt for-
mats and frames of reference, showing that explicit ge-
ometric and relational cues—like coordinates and refer-
ence frames—outperform long, free-form CoT reasoning.
Beyond text, visual prompting has proven complementary.
Spatial-MM [7] shows that supplying bounding boxes or
scene graphs—either annotated or self-generated—greatly im-
proves multi-hop spatial reasoning, where CoT alone fails.
Mind’s Eye [9] extends this with the Visualization-of-Thought
paradigm, where the model visualizes reasoning traces during
inference, significantly boosting 2D spatial reasoning accuracy.
Additionally, progressive prompting frameworks decompose
complex queries into manageable steps. SpatialPIN [11] em-
ploys multi-stage prompting with dense visual priors from
multiple vision foundation models, demonstrating the benefits
of structured, incremental reasoning. For quantitative spatial
TABLE IV: Summary of tool-usage methods for multimodal
spatial reasoning. ✓indicates the method supports the feature.
Method
UI ops (crop/seg)
2D perception
3D recon
Append images/ traces
Serialize tokens/ BEV
Render novel views
Agentic control
Plan–Execute
ReAct
IoT [100]
✓
✗
✗
✓
✗
✗
✗
✗
✗
Struct2D [101]
✗
✓
✗
✗
✓
✗
✗
✗
✗
Lee et al. [102]
✗
✓
✗
✗
✓
✗
✗
✗
✗
ZeroVLM [103, 104]
✗
✗
✓
✓
✗
✓
✗
✗
✗
SpatialPIN [11]
✗
✓
✓
✗
✓
✓
✗
✗
✗
VADAR [105]
✗
✓
✗
✗
✓
✗
✓
✓
✗
SpatialAgent [10]
✗
✓
✗
✗
✓
✗
✓
✓
✓
reasoning, SpatialPrompt [98] improves performance by estab-
lishing explicit spatial anchors and prompting stepwise trans-
formations relative to them. SpatialMind [99] integrates scene
representations—modeled as object-centric text, 2D grids, or
3D maps—with question-type–specific reasoning plans (e.g.,
locate →transform →compare), guiding more systematic
inference at test time.
Insights & Discussion. The evolution from simple CoT
prompting to spatially structured prompting reveals a key dis-
tinction between linguistic and spatial reasoning in MLLMs.
While textual CoT assumes that verbalizing intermediate steps
improves reasoning, spatial reasoning requires explicit mod-
eling of visual relations—through visual traces, structured
graphs, or reference-based transformations. This indicates that
effective spatial prompting depends less on longer reasoning
chains and more on aligning prompt representations with the
inherently visual and relational nature of spatial cognition.
Future work may explore adaptive prompting frameworks
that automatically select the most suitable representational
format—textual, visual, or hybrid—based on the type of
spatial query and reasoning context.
2) Tool Usage: Integrating tools at test time enhances
MLLMs’ spatial reasoning by providing explicit geometric or
structural priors without modifying the base model. As in Ta-
ble IV, three main tool families have emerged. First, UI-style
visual operations (e.g., crop, zoom, mark, edge, and segmenta-
tion) expose fine-grained spatial cues often missed by MLLMs.
For instance, Image-of-Thought [100] directs the model to
plan and execute short visual operation sequences, generating
“visual rationales” that are fed back alongside text reason-
ing. Second, 2D perception modules—such as object detec-
tion, orientation, depth, and pose estimation—convert pixels
into structured, object-centric facts. Struct2D [101] renders a
BEV canvas with filtered object marks and metadata (IDs,
categories, coordinates), while Lee et al. [102] constructed
abstract scene layouts to support perspective transformations.
Third, 3D reconstruction tools lift images into view-consistent
geometry for perspective-based reasoning. ZeroVLM [103]
employs Zero-1-to-3 [104] to synthesize novel views and pair
them with “view prompts” that anchor camera relations, and


6
SpatialPIN [11] partially reconstructs lightweight 3D objects
for downstream spatial queries.
Given these tools, inference-time integration generally fol-
lows three escalating patterns. First, some methods append
tool-generated images or traces to the input: IoT concate-
nates cropped or segmented snippets as visual evidence,
while ZeroVLM stitches multi-view mosaics with view-aware
prompts [100, 103]. Second, others serialize perception into
structured tokens or sketches: Struct2D supplies a BEV bitmap
with concise object metadata, and Lee et al. inject numeric
orientations and perspective descriptors to convert allocentric
queries into egocentric ones [101, 102]. Finally, 3D-aware ap-
proaches render novel views from reconstructed geometry: Ze-
roVLM generates left/right/random perspectives to test view-
point sensitivity, while SpatialPIN’s partial 3D lifting enables
virtual viewpoints that re-ground spatial relations [11, 103].
Beyond single-shot prompting, modern systems increasingly
control tools through agentic policies at inference. VADAR
(Visual Agentic AI) [105] designs a dynamic API and synthe-
sizes short programs that call specialized modules (detector,
depth, pose) on demand—illustrating “plan-to-execute” tool
use via code generation for reliable multi-step reasoning. Spa-
tialScore’s SpatialAgent [10] provides a standardized multi-
agent framework with nine spatial tools and two control
paradigms: a hierarchical Plan–Execute pipeline and an in-
terleaved ReAct mode that alternates reasoning and action,
enabling consistent cross-method evaluation. Diagnostics fur-
ther reveal which tool outputs matter most. Ravi et al. [106]
show in Disjoint-3DQA that trajectories or BEV features
offer limited gains across non-co-visible frames, while oracle
3D coordinates yield substantial improvements—highlighting
metrically faithful 3D states or persistent scene memory as the
most effective feedback signals.
Insights & Discussion. Test-time tool use works by external-
izing geometry into inputs MLLMs already consume—visual
traces, structured tokens, and novel views—rather than elon-
gating textual CoT. Gains are largest when signals are met-
rically grounded (poses, coordinates, calibrated depth) and
agentic controllers compose tools into reusable subroutines,
improving perspective shifts, occlusions, and multi-object rela-
tions without retraining. ①Remaining issues: perception and
view-synthesis errors propagate without uncertainty handling;
2D proxies (BEV, trajectories) poorly approximate metric
3D state; temporal persistence is weak—no durable, object-
centric world memory; and tool outputs lack standardized
units/frames, harming alignment and reproducibility. Multi-
tool pipelines also add cost and latency for open-world, long-
horizon tasks. ②Promising directions: maintain a persistent
object-centric scene memory with cross-view/time checks and
lightweight geometric self-verification; standardize tool out-
puts (schemas for objects/cameras/constraints with calibrated
uncertainty) to enable evidence weighting and conflict reso-
lution; and develop budget-aware controllers that switch be-
tween Plan–Execute and ReAct, add verify–reflect loops, and
distill heavy chains into compact prompts/plugins—evaluated
with utility–cost–robustness metrics in long-horizon, non-co-
visible, open-world regimes.
3) Others: Beyond prompt engineering and tool use, sev-
eral training-free inference strategies improve spatial reason-
ing. The first category is self-consistency voting. Sample
multiple reasoning chains and take a consensus to stabilize
answers under perspective shifts and multi-object relations.
Secondly, multimodal search explores and prunes visual-
spatial reasoning paths at test time; e.g., VISUOTHINK per-
forms look-ahead tree search over interleaved visual-textual
steps and selects the best-scoring solution under spatial con-
straints [12]. There are also retrieval-augmented generation
(RAG) methods. Inject external spatial knowledge at infer-
ence. LOGIC-RAG [13] builds a dynamic first-order logic
knowledge base (object positions/relations) from visual input
and feeds these facts to the model, increasing driving-scene
spatial accuracy from ∼55–75% to >80–90%. Grounding in
retrieved maps/KBs or computed facts reduces hallucinations
and sharpens spatial relations.
Insights
&
Discussion. Enhancing spatial reasoning in
MLLMs often requires more than static prompts or single-pass
outputs. Exploring multiple reasoning paths, retrieving exter-
nal spatial knowledge, performing light test-time adaptation,
and preserving spatial context collectively scale inference-
time capability and complement prompt/tool methods. These
approaches carry trade-offs—e.g., multi-sampling and adapta-
tion increase compute, while retrieval depends on knowledge
quality—but they point toward MLLMs that dynamically and
reliably reason about space with higher accuracy.
B. Post-Training Methods
Post-Training methods enhance spatial reasoning by adapt-
ing MLLMs after pre-training, mainly through supervised fine-
tuning and reinforcement learning (RL). These approaches
rely on spatially targeted datasets, rewards, and curricula to
strengthen model understanding of geometry and motion.
1) Supervised Fine-tuning (SFT): SFT advances spatial rea-
soning by progressively broadening supervision from domain-
specific static scenes to dynamic, temporally grounded reason-
ing. On the data side, domain-grounded QA continues to seed
robust priors. CITYGPT [107] injects urban navigation and
landmark knowledge through structured instructions, while
MULTI-SPATIALMLLM [14] moves from single images to
multi-frame settings, annotating frame-level relations (e.g.,
depth, camera/object motion) to capture persistence and oc-
clusion. Extending this trend, LLAVA-ST [108] aligns fine-
grained spatio-temporal understanding by coupling language
with explicit coordinates and temporal anchors, and ST-
THINK [109] focuses the lens on egocentric 4D reasoning
to expose viewpoint changes and long-horizon temporal cues
missing from static corpora. Synthetic pipelines complement
real data: SAT [110] generates interactive, motion-centric
tasks in simulation to cover self-motion and object-motion
factors, and SPARE [111] automatically distills spatial QA
from long-form descriptions to relieve the long-tail sparsity of
rare relations. In between these regimes, SPATIALVLM [15]
augments instruction tuning with region tags and relative-
position tokens (left-of, in-front-of, between, etc), pairing
layout-driven QA and referring expressions so that textual


7
TABLE V: Comparison of reinforcement learning methods for
spatial reasoning in MLLMs. ✓indicates the presence of a
feature, × indicates absence.
Method
Reward Design
Process-level Reward
Curriculum Learning
Self-Play / Exploration
3D Spatial Metrics
Temporal Consistency
Video-R1 [16]
✓
✗
✗
✗
✗
✓
Spatial-R1 [3]
✓
✓
✗
✗
✗
✓
MetaSpatial [116]
✓
✓
✓
✗
✓
✗
R1-Zero [117]
✓
✗
✗
✓
✗
✗
ST-Think [109]
✓
✗
✗
✗
✗
✓
M2-Reasoning [118]
✓
✗
✓
✗
✗
✓
predicates are explicitly bound to coordinates/regions rather
than inferred implicitly.
Training strategy then ties these sources together. Curricula
that progress from perception to composition remain effective:
SPARKLE [112] stages supervision from detection/localization
toward multi-hop spatial reasoning. In parallel, motion-aware
instruction tuning such as ST-VLM [113] makes kinematics
explicit with trajectory-style hints. Multi-stage alignment fur-
ther stabilizes learning: LLAVA-ST [108] couples semantic-
to-coordinate alignment with video-aware objectives, whereas
SAT [110] interleaves dynamic spatial tasks as higher-level
“sub-curricula” to encourage transfer from static to viewpoint-
shifting scenarios. Looking beyond plain instruction tun-
ing, “thinking” overlays also matter: VISUALIZATION-OF-
THOUGHT [114] and VISUAL+TEXTUAL THINKING [115]
introduce multimodal reasoning traces (textual steps with
region/coordinate cues), nudging the model to externalize
intermediate spatial inferences rather than collapsing them into
a single answer token.
Insights & Discussion. SFT highlights the value of task-
specific data and structured curricula for strengthening spatial
reasoning in MLLMs. Compared with pre-training alone,
spatially grounded supervision enables models to internalize
explicit spatial relations, motion cues, and temporal dependen-
cies often missing in general multimodal data. Methodologi-
cally, SFT studies show that gradual exposure to increasing
spatial complexity—starting from low-level perception (e.g.,
object localization) to higher-order reasoning (e.g., trajectory
prediction, multi-hop inference)—consistently improves model
performance. Incorporating temporally annotated or motion-
aware datasets further allows models to reason over both static
configurations and dynamic evolution. Nonetheless, current
SFT methods depend heavily on human-labeled or synthetic
data, limiting scale and diversity. Future work could focus on
automatically generating spatial annotations, leveraging self-
supervised pretexts, or designing adaptive multi-task curricula
that balance static and dynamic reasoning. Ultimately, effective
SFT should align supervision with the cognitive structure of
spatial reasoning, bridging perception and high-level spatial
understanding.
2) Reinforcement Learning (RL): RL enhances spatial rea-
soning by optimizing models through reward-driven feedback
rather than explicit supervision.
On rewards, as in Table V VIDEO-R1 [16] introduces
a time-order–aware signal (e.g., preferring correct answers
on ordered vs. shuffled clips) to explicitly reward temporal
use, while SPATIAL-R1/SPACER [3] extends beyond out-
come rewards to process-aware credit for intermediate steps
(e.g., partial route/landmark correctness, local relation checks)
to improve reward stability. For 3D layout and interaction,
METASPATIAL [116] blends format checks, physical feasibil-
ity, and rendering-based validation—together with object-level
modulation—for consistent spatial plans. Unifying general and
spatial reasoning, M2-REASONING [118] adopts task-specific
RLVR signals (e.g., coordinate/ordering correctness) so that
spatial subtasks contribute targeted feedback without derailing
broader multimodal skills.
Training strategies typically follow a staged recipe—warm
up with SFT, then refine with RL, and finally stabilize with
self-improvement. VIDEO-R1 [16] uses SFT to initialize video
reasoning and then applies temporally sensitive RL to consol-
idate it. Similarly, ST-THINK [109] employs Long-CoT SFT
followed by GRPO; meanwhile, reverse thinking is used as
the explicit thought style in RL, strengthening bidirectional
spatial recall. METASPATIAL [116] employs curriculum-style
increases in scene difficulty and multi-round refinement so that
rewards stay informative as tasks grow more complex. Self-
play closes the loop: R1-Zero–like training [117] generates
and solves spatial puzzles autonomously, reducing dependence
on human labels and converting search over solutions into
search over training data. In broader multi-task settings, M2-
REASONING [118] interleaves spatial RLVR with general-
purpose tasks and dynamic scheduling, mitigating interference
while retaining cross-task transfer.
Overall, these approaches illustrate how RL advances spatial
reasoning from two complementary angles: (1) reward design,
which explicitly encodes geometric and temporal correctness;
and (2) self-improvement, where models iteratively refine
reasoning through autonomous exploration. Compared with
supervised fine-tuning, RL offers a more flexible framework
for post-training adaptation—enhancing spatial consistency,
dynamic reasoning, and generalization without modifying the
base architecture.
Insights & Discussion. Reinforcement learning (RL) provides
a powerful framework for improving spatial reasoning in
MLLMs by optimizing beyond static supervision. The re-
viewed methods reveal a clear evolution: from composite task-
level rewards (VIDEO-R1) to process-level and curriculum-
based optimization (SPATIAL-R1, METASPATIAL), and finally
to autonomous self-play learning (R1-ZERO). This progres-
sion reflects a shift from externally guided training toward
self-improving spatial cognition.
Two primary insights emerge. First, reward granularity
matters—integrating intermediate reasoning rewards and geo-
metric correctness encourages stable and interpretable spatial
learning. Second, autonomous exploration enables continual
improvement without reliance on labeled data, a promising
direction for scalable spatial intelligence.


8
However, current RL frameworks remain constrained by
high computational cost, reward sparsity, and limited gen-
eralization across 2D–3D–temporal domains. Future research
could develop hybrid paradigms that combine RL with super-
vised fine-tuning or self-distillation, using automatically gen-
erated spatial feedback signals. Advancing toward richer, self-
supervised spatial rewards and cross-domain generalization
will be key to achieving more human-like spatial reasoning
in multimodal large language models.
C. MLLM Architectural Modifications
Beyond post-training, architectural changes are essential
for enabling MLLMs to reason about space effectively. Most
MLLMs adopt a standard three-part structure—a pre-trained
LLM, a visual encoder, and a modality alignment interface [64,
119–123]. However, spatial reasoning demands explicit preser-
vation of positional and geometric information, which these
components alone cannot ensure. Recent studies have thus
proposed modifications to inject spatial knowledge either at
the input level or via specialized model components.
1) Enhancing Input Representations: One strategy is to
augment the model inputs with additional spatial cues so that
the LLM can infer geometric relations without changing the
core architecture.
The most straightforward one, SPATIALLLM [124], adopts
a composite 3D information design, where the vision front-end
mixes features from a language-supervised encoder (CLIP)
with features from a self-supervised encoder (DINOv2 or
MAE) to improve the 3D perception capability at the in-
put level. Going further, MPDRIVE [125] adds an extra
“marker” channel to each video frame, overlaying simple
glyphs or numeric labels at detected object centers. The model
processes the original RGB frame and this marker map in
parallel (dual-stream), effectively bridging visual coordinates
with language; this yields improved spatial understanding on
autonomous driving VQA tasks. Similarly, LOCVLM [126]
appends normalized (x, y) location coordinates of salient
objects directly into the text prompt (treating location as part
of the language input). By doing so, the LLM is encouraged
to reason about spatial relations (e.g., “left of”, “inside of”)
using these coordinate tokens, all without altering the pre-
trained vision encoder or adding new visual branches. Both
methods inject explicit spatial information into the model’s
context, which in turn guides the language model to produce
spatially-aware descriptions and answers. Another direction
is to incorporate depth and 3D cues as part of the input.
SPATIALBOT [127] feeds the model with both an RGB image
and its corresponding depth image (e.g., from a monocular
depth estimator), essentially giving the MLLM a pseudo-3D
view of the scene. This simple input-level fusion of color and
depth significantly boosts the model’s depth perception and
spatial QA performance, as evidenced by improvements on the
SpatialQA benchmark and embodied AI tasks. Rather than im-
ages, SSR [128] leverages depth information in textual form:
it converts raw depth maps into structured natural-language
rationales describing the 3D layout (e.g., relative distances,
sizes, and occlusions). These intermediate text descriptions are
provided to the LLM (as a chain-of-thought prompt) to guide
its reasoning and are later distilled into latent embeddings for
efficiency. This rationale-guided approach enables the model
to utilize depth cues for higher-order spatial reasoning without
requiring special sensors at inference. In a similar vein, other
works enrich the model’s visual context by supplying multiple
views or an explicit 3D scene representation. For instance,
the SPATIO-TEMPORAL LLM framework [129] can input an
entire point cloud of the environment alongside an egocentric
video clip, allowing the LLM to consider the global 3D scene
while also tracking temporal events. Experiments show that
feeding both the holistic point cloud and video frames (plus
text) enables better spatial understanding of environments
and improves temporal grounding of actions. Likewise, MM-
SPATIAL [130] explores training MLLMs with multi-view
images of a scene and their associated metric depth values. By
exposing the model to multiple perspectives and precise depth
measurements during fine-tuning (via the CA-VQA dataset),
MM-Spatial achieves state-of-the-art 3D spatial understand-
ing; notably, it can estimate object sizes and distances with
accuracy on par with dedicated monocular depth estimators.
In summary, these input-centric approaches enhance spatial
reasoning by explicitly encoding geometry into the model’s
inputs (either as augmented images or as location/depth tokens
in text). This mitigates the loss of spatial information in
standard vision backbones and provides the LLM with a richer
basis for spatial inference.
Insights & Discussion. Input-centric augmentation remains
minimally invasive: marker channels or coordinate tokens
guide the LLM toward geometry without altering backbones,
while depth, multi-view, or point-cloud evidence supplies 3D
context that strengthens grounding. Yet performance is tightly
coupled to detector/depth fidelity, and longer contexts strain
alignment and attention memory. Uncertainty-aware spatial
tokenizers and differentiable 2D–3D projectors that compress
geometry, paired with curricula that progress from single-view
to spatio-temporal inputs, are likely to curb shortcut reliance
and improve cross-domain generalization.
2) Redesigning Spatial Reasoning Modules: An alternative
(and complementary) approach introduces dedicated archi-
tectural modules that are tailored for spatial and relational
reasoning. Here, the base MLLM architecture is extended
with new components (or entire sub-networks) that preserve
spatial structure through the model’s internal representations.
For example, SPATIAL-MLLM [17] introduces a dedicated
spatial encoder built on a lightweight VGGT backbone.
Given sampled video frames, this encoder produces 3D-aware
features that retain scene geometry. These features are then
linearly projected to match both the dimensionality and the
effective batch size of features from a conventional 2D visual
encoder. The two streams are concatenated and passed through
a modality bridge—a lightweight MLP—that converts them
into unified visual tokens, which are consumed alongside
text tokens by a shared LLM backbone. This geometry-
preserving, spatio-temporal pathway yields consistent gains on
spatial benchmarks, reporting 35-45% relative improvements
over strong baselines. Similarly, SPATIAL-ORMLLM [19]
incorporates a Spatial-Enhanced Feature Fusion block within


9
the vision tower to inject 3D understanding. In this design, 2D
image features are combined with rich 3D cues (e.g., depth or
volumetric estimates obtained via an external algorithm) inside
a fusion module, and the resulting 2D+3D feature is fed into
the LLM’s visual encoder. This end-to-end architecture effec-
tively endows the model with volumetric spatial reasoning us-
ing only monocular RGB input, achieving robust 3D scene un-
derstanding in complex environments (like surgical operating
rooms) without additional sensors. Another notable system,
SPATIALRGPT [18], integrates spatial reasoning capabilities
by adding a plug-in depth module and leveraging region-level
training signals. In particular, SpatialRGPT uses a “flexible”
depth-integration module that attaches to the existing visual
encoder, enabling it to process inferred depth maps alongside
RGB features. Moreover, it is trained with a curated pipeline of
3D scene-graph data to learn detailed regional representations,
which allows the model to interpret user-provided region
proposals and accurately judge their relative directions and
distances during inference. This yields marked improvements
in spatial question-answering, both with and without explicit
region prompts. Yet another architectural innovation is found
in CAMBRIAN-1 [131], a vision-centric multimodal model that
introduces a Spatial Vision Aggregator (SVA). The SVA is a
dynamic, spatially-aware connector module that fuses high-
resolution visual feature maps into the LLM while intelligently
reducing the number of visual tokens required. By preserving
fine-grained spatial information from the vision encoder and
feeding it more efficiently to the language model, Cambrian-
1 achieves better visual grounding and overall multimodal
performance (it served as an open-source testbed that reached
state-of-the-art results on a new CV-Bench benchmark).
Across these designs, the common theme is the addition
of structural bias for space: by introducing new layers or
networks devoted to geometric processing (be it via explicit
spatial feature fusion, graph relationships, or high-res feature
aggregation), the models can maintain spatial layouts through
the reasoning process, instead of relying solely on implicit
signals in the image embeddings.
Insights & Discussion. Dedicated modules inject geometric
inductive bias: multi-scale encoders, relation graphs, and spa-
tial cross-attention preserve layout/topology; domain-tailored
2D+3D fusion and depth-integrated connectors enhance ro-
bustness under occlusion and clutter. Furthermore, vision-
centric aggregators retain fine spatial detail with fewer tokens,
and aligning static 3D context with video stabilizes temporal
grounding. Nevertheless, added complexity, latency, and re-
liance on pseudo-3D labels motivate intent-aware routing be-
tween spatial modules and the LLM, unified 2D/3D/temporal
consistency objectives, and lightweight hardware-friendly spa-
tial layers for deployment.
D. Explainability of Multimodal Spatial Reasoning
Understanding why MLLMs struggle with spatial reasoning
is essential for advancing their design and interpretability.
Recent studies have provided valuable insights into these
limitations and suggested strategies for improvement.
From a mechanistic perspective, Rajabi et al. [132] reveal
through attention visualization that current MLLMs often
rely on object co-occurrence rather than genuine geometric
grounding. To address this, they propose decomposing spa-
tial descriptions into grounded subject–object–relation triplets,
linking detection and positional features through a lightweight
relational bridge.
Following this thread, Qi et al. [20] identify a representa-
tional imbalance in multimodal Transformers where dominant
vision embeddings suppress positional encodings, erasing spa-
tial order. Using interpretability metrics, they attribute this to
cross-modal norm disparities and propose normalizing vision
token magnitudes and injecting mid-layer geometric features
to recover spatial sensitivity without altering the backbone.
Chen et al. [21] further analyze attention maps and found
that only 15–20% of attention weights target regions en-
coding spatial relationships, indicating that MLLMs focus
on isolated objects instead of inter-object relations. They
propose ADAPTVIS, a training-free inference strategy that
dynamically adjusts attention based on confidence, helping the
model refocus on relevant spatial regions. This process-level
modulation highlights attention control as an effective route to
better spatial grounding.
In parallel, Wen et al. [22] show that even large MLLMs
often depend on bounding-box heuristics instead of genuine re-
lational cues. They recast spatial relation prediction as a global
object–object interaction problem and introduce RelatiViT,
a transformer that integrates relation-awareness directly into
self-attention, embedding structural bias for spatial reasoning
into the encoder itself.
Finally, Zhang et al. [133] take a broader view, showing
that simply scaling multimodal data yields diminishing gains
on spatial reasoning tasks. Their analysis indicates that spatial
competence relies more on the positional fidelity of the vision
encoder than on the LLM’s textual positional signals. They
advocate embedding explicit 3D-aware modules and cross-
view fusion layers to ensure spatial understanding emerges
from structure rather than scale.
Insights & Discussion. Together, these studies converge on a
shared diagnosis: MLLMs exhibit strong semantic reasoning
but weak spatial grounding due to representational imbalance,
attention bias, and lack of geometric priors, which emphasize
the need for models that balance semantic and spatial repre-
sentations. Future research should focus on integrating these
complementary insights—explicit spatial grounding, balanced
cross-modal encoding, relation-aware attention, and geometry-
informed architectural priors—to enhance the accuracy and ro-
bustness of MLLMs in reasoning about spatial configurations.
IV. MULTIMODAL SPATIAL REASONING IN 3D SPACE
Multimodal spatial reasoning in 3D space is a key area of
research, with significant implications for downstream appli-
cations such as navigation [38, 39], vision-language-action
tasks [139, 140], and more. This section focuses on foun-
dational tasks with multimodal spatial reasoning, including
3D grounding, 3D scene reasoning, and 3D generation. As
illustrated in Figure 4, we provide an overview of these core
tasks, highlighting their roles within the broader landscape of
3D spatial understanding.


10
Year
Method
Input
Backbone
Highlights
2023
LLM-Grounder [23]
Point Cloud
GPT-4
Uses LLM as an agent for 3D closed-loop, feedback-driven visual grounding,
which is fully zero-shot and open-vocabulary
2023
Grounded 3D-LLM [24]
Point Cloud
Tiny-Vicuna-1B
Unifies 3D task modeling with LLM
2024
Vigor [134]
Point Cloud
GPT-3.5-Turbo
Introduces referential order modeling for language-obj structure
2023
ViewRefer [135]
Multi-View Image
GPT-3
Multi-view modeling improves spatial perception
2023
3DAxiesPrompts [2]
Multi-View Image
GPT-4V
First to encode 3D coordinates into prompt input
2024
VLM-Grounder [25]
Multi-View Image
GPT-4V
Utilizes dynamic stitching strategy that dynamically uses the optimal layouts
to stitch images, enhancing VLM’s performance
2024
SpatialRGPT [18]
RGB-D
LLaMA2-7B
Modular design enables flexible integration
2024
ZSVG3D [136]
RGB-D
GPT3.5
First use of program generation in 3DVG
2024
SeeGround [26]
Text+RGB+3D
Qwen2-VL-72B
Dynamically adjusts perspectives to capture essential details
2025
ReasonGrounder [27]
RGB+3DGS
LLaVA 1.5
Integrates LVLM, 3DGS, and hierarchical features, enables amodal perception
under occlusion
TABLE VI: Comparison of recent multimodal spatial reasoning methods in 3D Grounding.
Fig. 4: An overview of core spatial reasoning tasks in 3D space, including 3D visual grounding[18, 134], 3D scene reasoning[11,
37], and 3D generation[137, 138].
Fig. 5: 3D visual grounding with MLLM [23].
A. 3D Visual Grounding
As in Figure 5, given a natural language description, 3D
grounding involves localizing an object in a 3D scene. This
task requires strong spatial reasoning to handle complex in-
structions and is crucial for robotics and AR, combining lan-
guage understanding and 3D spatial reasoning. Traditional 3D
grounding methods are fully supervised on limited 3D datasets
with predefined object captions [141], but they struggle to
generalize to unseen objects and handle complex texts.
Unlike traditional methods, researchers are developing ap-
proaches based on MLLMs, significantly enhancing generaliz-
ability by leveraging large-scale priors. However, integrating
MLLMs into 3D grounding remains challenging [142]. Ex-
isting approaches for embedding MLLMs into 3D grounding
systems can be broadly categorized based on the input data
modality: ①direct utilization of 3D representations and spatial
information; ②generation of multi-view 2D images rendered
from 3D scenes; ③hybrid methods combining both 2D and
3D modalities, as shown in Table VI.
1) 3D Input: Some methods perform spatial reasoning
by embedding 3D formats—such as point clouds, voxels,
or learned volumetric features—into MLLMs [23, 24, 134].
LLM-Grounder [23] adopts a coarse-to-fine approach, first
using an MLLM to parse complex linguistic concepts and
an open-vocabulary 3D vision module to generate candidate
proposals, then evaluating their semantic alignment with the
query. Grounded 3D-LLM [24] integrates scene-referent to-


11
kens into the MLLM and employs alignment training to en-
able 3D input, leveraging the MLLM’s reasoning capabilities.
Vigor [134] focuses on interpreting spatial language by using
an LLM to infer the referential order of entities, enhancing
fine-grained spatial reasoning.
Insights & Discussion. In summary, these approaches focus
on 3D visual grounding by embedding 3D representations into
MLLMs and utilizing their spatial reasoning ability. How-
ever, while embedding 3D modalities holds great potential,
it presents challenges. The complexity of 3D data structures
can hinder model interpretability, and the limited availability
of labeled 3D datasets constrains the development of robust,
generalizable models for open-world applications.
2) Multi-view Input: While 3D point clouds provide ex-
plicit scene representation, they present challenges for models
due to the complexity of spatial information. To address this,
researchers are increasingly adopting multi-view 2D represen-
tations as a promising alternative. This approach leverages the
spatial reasoning capabilities of existing 2D MLLMs with min-
imal modifications. Representative methods include ViewRe-
fer [135], VLM-Grounder [25], and 3DAxisPrompt [2].
A key challenge in multi-view 3D visual grounding is
view discrepancy, which arises from the misalignment between
the model’s perspective and the source of the grounding
instruction. Several methods have been proposed to mitigate
this issue. For example, ViewRefer [135] introduces learnable
multi-view prototypes to capture inter-view relationships and
enable knowledge transfer. VLM-Grounder [25] dynamically
stitches image sequences and incorporates a grounding-and-
feedback mechanism. 3DAxisPrompt [2] enhances the real-
world scene by inserting 3D coordinate axes.
Insights
&
Discussion. These works leverage powerful
MLLMs to align with 3D scenes using 2D multi-view inputs.
However, key challenges remain [18]: First, MLLMs designed
for global image understanding struggle with parsing specific
object regions. Second, spatial perception extends beyond
RGB data and requires geometric information like depth or
spatial coordinates.
3) Hybrid of 2D and 3D: To combine the advantages of
both 3D and multi-view representations, recent methods utilize
hybrid inputs, including [18, 26, 136, 143]. SpatialRGPT [18]
highlights the limitations of MLLMs relying solely on RGB
pixels for 3D tasks. It proposes integrating relative depth maps
from depth prediction models with RGB images to enhance
spatial perception and reasoning. ZSVG3D [136] defines a
visual program interface to standardize spatial relationships,
enabling reasoning plans for grounding. SeeGround [26]
integrates 2D visuals with explicit 3D spatial descriptions
to improve object localization. 3D-MOOD [144] achieves
monocular open-set 3D object detection via lifting the open-set
2D detection into 3D space. ReasonGrounder [27] introduces
3D Gaussian splatting features as intermediate representations
from SAM [145] and CLIP [119].
Insights & Discussion. These methods demonstrate the lim-
itations of using only 2D or 3D representations and propose
strategies for integrating both modalities. Combining multi-
view images and 3D structures enhances performance and
robustness in 3D visual grounding systems.
Year
Method
Alignment Technique
2023
Chat-3D [150]
Multi-modal Transformer
2023
Chat-Scene [151]
Multi-modal Transformer
2023
3D-LLM [152]
Q-Former-liked module
2023
GPT4Point [146]
Q-Former-liked module
2024
LL3DA [37]
Q-Former-liked module
2023
LEO [147]
LLaVA-liked module
2024
Scene-LLM [148]
LLaVA-liked module
2024
LLaVA-3D [28]
LLaVA-liked module
2025
3D-LLaVA [153]
LLaVA-liked module
TABLE VII: Comparison in alingment methods.
B. 3D Scene Reasoning and Question Answering (QA)
3D scene reasoning and QA require models capable of
processing 3D representations—such as point clouds, meshes,
neural radiance fields, or multi-view RGB-D inputs—and
generating natural language responses grounded in the spatial
and semantic structure of the environment. Current research
falls into two paradigms: training-required and training-free.
Training-required methods fine-tune MLLMs, typically via
Q-Former [37, 146] or projection-layer modules [147, 148].
Training-free methods use frozen MLLMs with progressive
prompting [11] and chain-of-thought reasoning [11, 149].
1) Training-required: Training-required studies can be clas-
sified into three categories: ①Alignment approach: These
methods focus on aligning 3D features with language modal-
ities. ②Training efficiency: Aiming to reduce complexity
and improve convergence. ③3D Representation: Expand-
ing beyond conventional 3D representations to scene graphs,
3DGS [154, 155], etc.
The next sections elaborate on each category, summarizing
current advancements in multimodal spatial reasoning for 3D.
①Recent methods focus on aligning 3D scene features
with MLLM feature spaces. Early works [150, 151] use 3D
detectors to extract object-level representations, which are
aligned with text features using 3D-text paired data, enabling
MLLMs to leverage prior knowledge. However, reliance on
3D detectors can be a bottleneck. To address this, inspired by
Q-Former [156], recent works [37, 146, 152, 157] integrate
similar designs into 3D MLLMs for more complex reasoning.
For example, 3UR-LLM [157] uses a 3D compressor to
condense 3D features into compact vision tokens and a 3D
query fusion mechanism to select high-confidence queries,
improving reasoning robustness.
Besides Q-Former, several methods [28, 147, 148, 153] are
inspired by LLaVA. These approaches use a projection layer to
align the feature space with LLMs, enabling them to process
3D inputs and leverage their spatial reasoning capabilities.
For example, Scene-LLM [148] employs a two-stage strategy,
training a projection layer with conceptual annotations while
keeping the LLM frozen. An overview of these alignment
techniques is presented in Table VII.
②Beyond improving alignment quality, recent studies [28,
153, 158, 159] note that aligning 3D features with language is
time-consuming. To improve efficiency, 3DMIT [158] removes


12
Year
Method
Representation
Training
2024
3DGraphLLM [29]
Scene Graph
Full Training
2025
SplatTalk [160]
3DGS
Fine-tuning
2025
GPT4Scene [161]
BEV
Zero-shot / Fine-tuning
TABLE VIII: Comparison of multimodal spatial reasoning
methods with diverse 3D representations.
the alignment step by focusing on instruction tuning for
spatial understanding. LLaVA-3D [28] retains LLaVA’s 2D
multimodal capabilities by constructing 3D patches and using
3D-aware positional encoding. Inst3D-LMM [159] introduces
multi-task instruction tuning, enabling adaptation to various
spatial reasoning tasks without task-specific fine-tuning.
③Recent works [29, 160, 161] focus on diverse 3D
representations, including 3D scene graphs, 3DGS, and BEV.
3DGraphLLM [29] creates a learnable 3D scene graph to en-
hance spatial reasoning by utilizing richer structural informa-
tion. SplatTalk [160] integrates language features from RGB
images into a unified 3DGS [154] representation, supporting
spatial reasoning. GPT4Scene [161] improves reasoning by
reconstructing BEV images from 3D scene videos and estab-
lishing a consistent mapping between local views and global
scene structure. A comparison of these 3D representations is
provided in Table VIII.
Insights & Discussion. Efforts to enhance 3D spatial reason-
ing in MLLMs focus on modality alignment, training effi-
ciency, and exploring alternative 3D representations. However,
challenges remain: ①Training 3D-aware models is computa-
tionally intensive due to complex data and architectures. ②
The lack of large, diverse, and well-annotated 3D datasets
limits the effectiveness of supervised training. ③The absence
of transparent reasoning mechanisms hinders interpretability
and understanding of model decisions. Addressing these lim-
itations could further advance MLLMs for spatial reasoning.
2) Training-free Methods: Training-free methods [11, 30,
149, 165] leverage the prior knowledge in MLLMs for mul-
timodal spatial reasoning without the need for fine-tuning.
These methods explore various prompting strategies to facil-
itate interpretable spatial reasoning. Some works [11, 149]
use MLLMs to extract semantic object attributes and apply
the chain-of-thought mechanism, prompting sequential reason-
ing. SpatialPIN [11] is a modular framework that employs
progressive prompting to decompose and reconstruct explicit
3D representations, enhancing spatial reasoning. Agent3D-
Zero [30] introduces a Set-of-Line strategy for selecting and
analyzing multiple viewpoints, improving spatial reasoning
while reducing memory and computation. LLM-TPC [165]
employs a Think-Program-reCtify loop to bridge 3D visual
perception and reasoning, improving reliability through itera-
tive self-correction.
Insights & Discussion. These training-free methods utilize
MLLMs to summarize and refine spatial information through
diverse prompting strategies. Despite their success, they have
limitations: ①They depend on the quality of the MLLMs used,
and deficiencies in these models may hinder performance on
some tasks. ②Some methods involve complex inference steps,
reducing processing speed and making them less suitable for
real-time applications.
C. 3D Generation with Spatial Reasoning
3D generation [166, 167] has advanced rapidly, particu-
larly with the integration of LLMs and multimodal reasoning
systems. Scene-level and program-level generation demand
strong spatial reasoning capabilities. These tasks can be cate-
gorized into two aspects: ①3D Layout Generation: Generating
spatially reasonable indoor layouts from natural language or
multi-turn dialogues. ②3D Generation as Program: Treating
3D content generation as a programmatic task, where spatial
reasoning is framed as executable program generation.
1) 3D Layout Generation: Given the complexity of 3D
scene generation [168–170], researchers often use MLLMs for
initial 3D layout generation, followed by scene-level synthesis.
Figure 6 presents a qualitative comparison of representative 3D
scene generation approaches, showcasing variations in geomet-
ric fidelity, texture quality, and semantic consistency across
different methods. Approaches can be broadly categorized
based on how MLLMs are integrated into the layout pipeline:
①Direct Guidance for Scene Synthesis via LLMs:
MLLMs directly generate spatial configurations or layout
instructions, translating high-level descriptions into structured
commands for scene elements, such as furniture arrangement
and room dimensions. However, this direct mapping can
lead to implausible configurations, like overlapping objects.
Methods like LayoutGPT [5] and HOLODECK [163] address
this by incorporating optimization-based solvers or inferring
spatial relational constraints.
②Indirect Guidance for Scene Synthesis via LLMs:
Indirect guidance uses MLLMs to extract semantic knowl-
edge (e.g., object relationships or contextual constraints) to
guide subsequent 3D modeling. For instance, Diorama [138]
generates a scene graph defining object relationships, while
the MLLM retrieves multimodal 3D shapes. Approaches like
LayoutGPT [5] use programmatic reasoning to generate spatial
layout specifications, while HOLODECK [163] enhances this
with optimization techniques for physical realism. Iterative
methods, such as I-Design [164] and Generation Agents [171],
introduce multi-agent systems for step-by-step refinement.
LLPlace [172] supports real-time interactive layout refinement
through a conversational interface, and Chat2Layout [173]
combines VQA with visual prompting, enhancing spatial lay-
out reasoning.
Insights & Discussions. The primary approaches either gen-
erate positions directly or create intermediate representations
like scene graphs. Both paradigms leverage MLLMs for se-
mantically coherent and physically feasible 3D environments.
Future advancements in MLLMs could enhance both numeri-
cal accuracy and formatting capabilities.
2) 3D Generation as Program: Building on advances in
MLLM-based code generation (e.g., Cursor [174] and GitHub
Copilot [175]), recent work treats 3D synthesis as procedural
program generation, where geometry and layout are specified
by code. As shown in Fig. 7, a 3D model can be described by
a code snippet, leveraging MLLMs’ structured reasoning and


13
Fig. 6: Some comparative examples of 3D generations, such as input conditions (e.g., text or image), and outputs from different
approaches[138, 162–164], showcasing variations in geometry, texture, and semantic coherence.
import cadquery as cq
w0 = cq.Workplane('YZ', origin=(-14, 0, 0))
r = w0.workplane(offset=17 / 2).moveTo(4,-73.5).box(104, 53, 17)
.union(w0.sketch().segment((-78, 23), (2,-55)).segment((40,-17))
.arc((42,-24),(48,-30)).segment((48, 5)).segment((61, 5))
.segment((78, 22)).segment((-2, 100)).close().assemble()
.push([(0, 22)]).circle(50, mode='s').finalize().extrude(29))
Fig. 7: A demo for programming 3D object representation.
The left is a CAD model, and the right is the corresponding
code segment of CAD Query [33].
constraints. Current approaches target three output formats: ①
Blender scripts, ②CAD parametric programs, and ③mesh-
generation pipelines.
①Blender is the most common software in 3D model-
ing and animation, supporting operations via its API and
Python code. The following methods utilize MLLMs’ spa-
tial reasoning for programming outputs. 3D-GPT [32] intro-
duces a training-free framework where an LLM interprets
natural language commands and generates Blender scripts
to construct 3D scenes, unlocking the potential of MLLMs
in spatial programming. SceneCraft [176] proposes a dual-
loop optimization system: an inner loop refines scenes using
MLLM feedback, while the outer loop accumulates spatial
knowledge across iterations, enabling self-evolving capabili-
ties. SceneMotifCoder [177] introduces “visual programs” —
structured code representations extracted from example-based
demonstrations.
②In addition to Blender, other works extend spatial
reasoning into CAD modeling. CAD-GPT [178] enhances
spatial reasoning by integrating spatial tokens and positional
embeddings, enabling accurate generation of CAD sequences
from images or text. CAD2PROGRAM [179] converts 2D
engineering drawings into executable Python scripts using
MLLMs. CAD-Recode [33] maps point cloud data into Cad-
Query scripts via a lightweight encoder and pre-trained MLLM
backbone. CAD-LLaMA [180] designs a parametric language
to better utilize MLLMs’ spatial knowledge.
③Other work focuses on general mesh generation using
a programmatic approach. ShapeLib [181] guides LLMs in
constructing libraries through a hybrid human-AI workflow.
Insights & Discussions. These works reflect the expanding
scope of MLLMs in tackling complex, real-world tasks that
require deep spatial reasoning, precise geometric control, and
integration with downstream tools. While directly generating
3D representations is challenging, using MLLMs for 3D
content generation via programming harnesses their full spatial
reasoning potential. Programmatic generation is also more
controllable, making it better suited for real applications.
V. MULTIMODAL SPATIAL REASONING IN EMBODIED AI
Embodied
AI
is
regarded
as
a
crucial
path
toward
AGI [185]. The rapid progress of MLLMs positions them as
promising candidates for the core reasoning module of em-
bodied agents. Many of the core intelligences expected of em-
bodied agents—such as geometric reasoning, navigation, and
perspective-taking—fundamentally rely on spatial reasoning
capabilities as their foundation [186–188]. As demonstrated in
Fig. 8, in this section, we focus on the multimodal spatial rea-
soning capabilities of MLLM-based embodied agents within
the context of current mainstream tasks, including Vision-
Language Action (VLA), Vision-and-Language Navigation
(VLN), and other embodied AI tasks.
A. Multimodal Spatial Reasoning in VLA Models
VLA models generate executable actions from multimodal
inputs—typically visual observations and language instruc-
tions—using vision-language foundation models as their back-
bone. These systems often involve intermediate reasoning
steps, either implicit within the architecture or explicit through
modular design. Pioneering works such as OpenVLA [189]
and π0 [190] adopt an end-to-end paradigm, training VLMs
as reactive policies to predict low-level control actions from
large-scale demonstrations. Others [45, 191] decompose tasks
into natural language sub-tasks executed by reactive con-
trollers or lower-level VLAs, while some frameworks intro-
duce intermediate stages like affordance or goal-state predic-
tion followed by motion planning for action generation.
Regardless of the control representation, spatial reasoning
remains central to these systems. Research efforts to im-
prove spatial understanding in VLAs generally follow three
directions: ①integrating spatially informative sensor modal-
ities (e.g., depth, point clouds) to enrich spatial context; ②
adopting multi-task pre-training or co-training schemes that
implicitly encourage spatial reasoning; and ③incorporating


14
Human Intention Interpretation
Human: 
What is beneath the mirror, next 
to the cot?
Human:
Walk to the dresser and face the 
mirror.
Agent:
It is a dresser with many drawers.
Agent:
Understood.
Visual Environment Understanding
Embodied World Model
Embodied QA
Path Planning and Navigation
Embodied Grasping
Vision-and-Language Navigation (VLN)
Other Embodied Tasks
Vision-Language-Action (VLA)
Object Localization
Q: Where is the vase?
A *: On the table above the 
radiator.
Q: Can another cup be placed on 
the decorative shelf?
A *: No, it can’t.
Q: How can I walk to the TV?
A *: Walk straight ahead and 
turn right at the end.
Geometric Reasoning
Planning and Navigating
Grasp the chocolate 
to the plate.
Grasp the apple to 
the pot.
Spatially Informative Modalities
Multi-task Pre- and Co-training
Explicit Reasoning
Put the brown 
mug in the 
bottom shelf.
The brown mug 
is in front of the 
shelf and should 
be placed to the 
bottom. 
3D object detection
2D pointing
Grasp point and 
angle prediction
Fig. 8: Spatial reasoning in embodied tasks, such as VLA [6, 44, 182], VLN [183, 184] and other embodied tasks [47].
TABLE IX: Comparison of 3D-enhanced VLA methods.
✓indicates the feature is present, and ✗indicates it is absent.
Method
3D Perception
Depth Maps
Point Clouds
Goal Generation
Spatial Encoding
Training Strategy
3D-VLA [44]
✓
✓✓✓
✗
Diffusion-aligned
PointVLA [192]
✓
✗
✓
✗
✗
Action expert fusion
SpatialVLA [193]
✓
✓
✗
✗
✓
Monocular depth-based encoding
BridgeVLA [194]
✓
✗
✓
✗
✓Dual-phase (2D pre-train + 3D fine-tune)
explicit reasoning steps. The following subsections review
representative methods in each direction and discuss their
respective advantages and limitations.
1) Spatially informative input modalities: Several studies
enhance spatial understanding in VLA models by incorporat-
ing spatially informative modalities such as depth maps and
3D point clouds, as shown in Table IX. These additional inputs
compensate for the limitations of 2D visual data, which often
lack the geometric cues needed for reasoning about physical
interactions in 3D space. 3D-VLA [44] enhances a language
model with 3D perception and goal generation by introducing
interaction tokens for objects, locations, scenes, and actions. It
aligns the language model with diffusion models that generate
goal images, depth maps, and point clouds from instructions.
PointVLA [192] combines 2D image features from a VLM
and 3D point cloud features from a point encoder as inputs
to an action expert for prediction. SpatialVLA [193] encodes
3D information into 2D observations using 3D-aware posi-
tional encodings derived from monocular depth predictions.
BridgeVLA [194] employs dual-phase training: pre-training a
VLM for 2D heatmap-based object localization and fine-tuning
with multi-view orthographic projections of 3D point clouds
to generate action trajectories.
Insights & Discussion. These approaches show promise for
action prediction with richer spatial perception, but challenges
remain. A key limitation is the scarcity of large-scale datasets
compared to vision–language corpora [192, 194], motivating
synthetic data [44] or imputing missing modalities with pre-
trained models (e.g., SpatialVLA [193]). Yet such approxima-
tions often underperform. Moreover, models trained at scale
on 2D vision–language data still lead overall [6, 45, 190],
indicating that fully leveraging extra modalities will require
targeted pre-training and more data-efficient architectures.
2) Multi-task Pre- and Co-training: Another major ap-
proach to enhance spatial understanding in VLA models is
to modify the training regime to include auxiliary tasks that
implicitly encourage spatial reasoning, such as embodied ques-
tion answering or 3D bounding box detection, as in Table X.
This is typically achieved through pre-training or co-training
frameworks that share representations across related spatial
tasks. The concept is first explored in RT-2 [195], which
jointly trained a VLM on visual question answering and robot


15
TABLE X: Comparison of multi-task pre- and co-training
strategies for VLA models. ✓indicates the feature is present,
and ✗indicates it is absent.
Method
Embodied QA
3D Tasks
Trajectory Pred.
Multi-Task Co-train
Curriculum / Stage
RT-2 [195]
✓
✗
✗
✓
✗
Gemini Robotics [6]
✓
✓
✓
✓
✓
π0.5 [45]
✓
✗
✓
✓
✓
ChatVLA [182]
✓
✗
✗
✓
✓
Magma [196]
✗
✗
✗
✓
✗
action prediction within a shared token space. Building on this
idea, recent large-scale models like GEMINI ROBOTICS [6]
and π0.5 [45] employ multi-stage co-training pipelines. GEM-
INI ROBOTICS [6] adopts a two-stage procedure: the base
VLM is first pre-trained on tasks including trajectory pre-
diction, multi-view correspondence, and 3D bounding box
detection, yielding the embodied reasoning model Gemini-ER
capable of few-shot control through in-context learning. The
model is then fine-tuned with an action decoder that outputs
low-level control commands for complex manipulation tasks.
Similarly, π0.5 [45] pre-trains its VLM backbone on a mixture
of tasks such as visual question answering, object localization,
sub-task prediction, and discrete action generation. During
post-training, an additional action head is introduced for
continuous control prediction, followed by fine-tuning for both
continuous control and sub-task reasoning.
ChatVLA [182] introduces a two-stage curriculum where
the model first learns control from robot data, then training
examples from other tasks, such as VQA, are gradually
introduces to preserve alignment with pre-trained VLM rep-
resentations. It also adopts a Mixture of Experts architecture
with task-specific heads to avoid task interference. Magma
[196] proposes to bridge the gap between vision-language
and action data via surrogate tasks that require predicting
actionable 2D annotations—Set-of-Mark and Trace-of-Mark.
This enables joint training on diverse datasets across digital
and physical domains using the same output representation.
Insights & Discussion. Pre- and co- training on spatial rea-
soning tasks is an effective way to enhance the generalization
capabilities of VLA models. However, this approach doesn’t
come without its challenges. It requires access to large and
diverse datasets, and carefully balancing multiple training ob-
jectives. Still, when these challenges are addressed, it remains
a core strategy for building capable VLA models.
3) Explicit Reasoning: A third line of research enhances
spatial reasoning in VLA models by introducing explicit
reasoning steps during action generation. Unlike reactive poli-
cies [139, 189, 190] that directly map inputs to actions, these
models incorporate structured intermediate representations and
multi-step reasoning to interpret spatial relations and plan sub-
tasks before executing actions.
ECoT [197] trains VLA models to generate step-by-step
reasoning chains grounded in the scene and robot state prior to
action prediction. These chains include high-level plans, sub-
tasks, object locations, and low-level motions, improving both
generalization and interpretability. Chat-VLA2 [46] builds on
ChatVLA by adding a reasoning-following module that aligns
generated actions with the backbone’s internal reasoning,
yielding better performance on multi-step spatial tasks. Chain-
of-Affordance [198] introduces an affordance-based reasoning
process that decomposes tasks into four stages: identifying
target objects, selecting grasp points, locating placement re-
gions, and planning trajectories. These affordances, generated
at inference time, guide the policy model’s action selection.
Similarly, RT-Affordance [199] proposes a hierarchical VLA
where action generation is conditioned on affordance plans.
An affordance prediction model first generates key poses from
images and task descriptions, which then guide a reactive VLA
to produce low-level control actions.
Insights & Discussion. Reasoning-augmented models improve
robustness, generalization, and interpretability in spatial tasks
by explicitly modeling intermediate steps such as object se-
lection, spatial relations, and action planning. This structured
reasoning helps policies handle novel objects, scenes, and
instructions more effectively than purely reactive baselines.
While early methods introduced substantial inference over-
head, newer systems mitigate this through selective reasoning
and asynchronous pipelines. These trends suggest that the ben-
efits of explicit reasoning can be retained without prohibitive
latency, making such models increasingly practical for real-
world deployment.
4) Multimodal Spatial Reasoning in Vision Language back-
bone: Many current VLA models are fine-tuned from VLMs
or use them as backbones. These VLAs are claimed to
effectively inherit the prior knowledge of these pre-trained
models. To quantitatively assess the potential of the upstream
VLMs for robotics tasks, we collected open-source VLMs that
have been used in VLAs and evaluated them on spatial reason-
ing benchmarks relevant to embodied scenarios. Specifically,
OpenVLA [189] is fine-tuned from Prismatic [200], π0 is fine-
tuned from PaliGemma [201], TraceVLA [140] is fine-tuned
from Phi-3-Vision [202], and DexVLA [139] uses Qwen-2-
VL [203] as its backbone. As for the benchmarks, Embod-
ied Reasoning QA (ERQA) [6] is a benchmark specifically
designed for evaluating VLMs in embodied environments. It
tests the VLM’s ability to handle embodied tasks. On the
other hand, SpatialEval [93] and SPACE [204] are bench-
marks that assess the more fundamental and conventional
spatial reasoning abilities of VLMs, such as the ability to
judge relative spatial positions and distances. Both of these
capabilities are crucial for robotics. Therefore, we conducted
experiments by testing several VL backbones used in VLA on
these benchmarks. As shown in the Tab. XI, it is evident that
these backbones exhibit certain spatial reasoning abilities. This
is also why these models can achieve strong performance in
downstream applications after fine-tuning on robotic datasets.
B. Multimodal Spatial Reasoning in VLN Models
VLN [205] is a cooperative multimodal task where an agent
navigates 3D environments by following human instructions


16
Benchmark
Prismatic
PaliGemma
Qwen-2-VL
Phi3-Vision
ERQA [6]
32.25
27.25
32.50
34.00
SpatialEval [93]
32.13
29.86
26.80
46.46
SPACE [204]
23.75
17.00
18.75
26.25
TABLE XI: Embodied-AI-related benchmark results across
different VLMs. Note that SpatialEval is tested using VTQA
mode(with Vision-Text input).
and communicating in context under ambiguity. It involves
four key components: visual perception, language understand-
ing, decision-making, and navigation execution—all requiring
strong spatial reasoning. During perception, the agent must
localize itself, interpret spatial relationships between objects,
and plan an efficient route. Finally, it executes the navigation
plan based on these spatial decisions.
1) Visual Environment Understanding and Generalization:
For a VLN agent, it is crucial to perceive and interpret its sur-
roundings, anticipate how actions alter the environment, and
align perception and decision-making with natural language
instructions. This requires understanding spatial arrangements,
localizing itself in 3D space, estimating distances between tar-
gets and landmarks, retaining spatial information, and tracking
environmental changes over time. These abilities collectively
depend on strong spatial reasoning, which underpins success
in complex vision-and-language navigation tasks.
Existing embodied scene perception methods often rely on
3D or 2.5D data to enhance spatial awareness, as summarized
in Tab. XII. To better utilize visual inputs, many approaches
explicitly preserve spatial features through multiview percep-
tion, depth images, or scene graphs. NaviLLM [207] leverages
multiview images to capture all reachable viewpoints from the
current position and constructs task-specific schemas for LLM-
based action generation. Cai et al. [127] propose SpatialBot,
which uses a depth API to query geometric information from
the environment and feed it back into the model, strength-
ening spatial understanding. ConceptGraphs [206] builds an
open-vocabulary 3D scene representation by associating 2D
foundation model outputs across multiple views.
Beyond visual encoding, another research direction focuses
on narrowing the semantic gap between natural language
and 3D scene understanding. Spartun3D-LLM [34] integrates
a 3D-aware LLM with a situated spatial alignment module
to better link 3D visual representations with corresponding
textual descriptions. Similarly, Wang et al. [208] introduce a
3D representation model for embodied tasks that predicts novel
views and BEV maps at multiple scales, aligning multi-scale
feature fields with multi-granularity language representations.
Beyond scene understanding, maintaining environmental
memory and tracking temporal changes are equally important.
Hong et al. [35] propose GSA-VLN, where agents dynam-
ically update parameters, leverage long-term memory, and
adapt to both environments and diverse user instructions.
Similarly, Yang et al. [209] present 3D-Mem, a memory archi-
tecture that encodes multi-view 3D snapshots to accumulate
and retrieve spatial information for long-term perception and
reasoning.
Insights & Discussion. Accurate perception, robust spatial
Text
Point Clouds
Multi-view image
Depth image
Scene Graph
BEV Map
Multimodal Input
Scene Memory
Text-3D 
Alignment
This is an indoor living room 
scene. The space includes walls, a 
ceiling, and a floor, with furniture 
such as a central table, chairs in 
front of it, and additional seating 
on the sides. ……
Fig. 9: Visual environment understanding in VLN tasks.
Current methods take text, point clouds [34], multi-view
images [207], RGB-D images [127, 206, 208] as inputs and
align them with 3D scene representations, while maintaining
structured memories such as scene graphs [206] and BEV
maps [208] for effective spatial reasoning.
reasoning, and generalization across diverse visual scenes are
fundamental for VLN agents. As shown in Fig. 9, recent
work emphasizes structured 3D representations, such as scene
graphs, BEV maps, and multiview memory, as effective tools
linking perception to reasoning and planning. A key challenge
remains the alignment of visual features with linguistic inputs,
especially under unfamiliar views or domain shifts.
2) Human Intention Interpretation and Instruction Com-
prehension: VLN agents are required to comprehend natural
language instructions provided by humans within specific
situational contexts to complete navigation tasks. This involves
cor rectly interpreting spatial expressions such as “left,” “up,”
and “front,” and developing the ability to reason spatially about
object locations, directions, and movements [8]. To facilitate
efficient instruction understanding, a common strategy is to
incorporate auxiliary modalities into the input. LL3DA [37]
encodes 3D point clouds and leverages an attention mechanism
to aggregate contextual information from both the scene and
human interactions.
In addition, improved VQA paradigms can further enhance
an agent’s instruction comprehension. AutoSpatial [36] applies
a hierarchical two-round VQA strategy during training, achiev-
ing both global and detailed understanding of scenarios, which
demonstrates more accurate spatial perception.
Moreover, certain methods, such as affordance prediction,
have been introduced to improve the model’s ability to attend
to fine-grained visual details under human instructions. Yuan et
al. [210] proposed RoboPoint, a vision-language model tai-
lored for predicting spatial affordances from relational lan-
guage inputs. The model predicts precise action points that
comply with spatial and physical constraints, thereby facilitat-
ing subsequent action execution.
Insights & Discussion. Recent work highlights the benefits
of auxiliary modalities, hierarchical reasoning, and affordance
modeling in improving instruction understanding. Multi-round
VQA and affordance prediction enhance fine-grained ground-
ing, while attention-based fusion with human interactions
supports contextual comprehension. Future advances may rely
on tighter integration of spatial perception and language rea-
soning, along with better generalization to diverse instructions
and complex real-world tasks.


17
Year
Method
Input
Backbone
Highlights
2024
ConceptGraphs [206]
RGB-D image
LLaVa
Constructs open-vocabulary 3D scene graphs
2024
NaviLLM [207]
Multi-view RGB image
Vicuna-7B-v0
Uses schema-based instruction to adapt LLMs
2025
Spartun3D-LLM [34]
Point Cloud
GPT4o
Integrates a 3D-based LLM with a spatial alignment module that links 3D
objects and relations to text, bridging the 3D-text gap
2025
g3D-LF [208]
RGB-D image
Vicuna-7B-v0
Proposes generalizable 3D-language feature fields
2025
SpatialBot [127]
RGB-D image
QWen1.5-0.5B
Introduces depth API to retrieve geometric information
TABLE XII: Comparison of recent multimodal spatial reasoning methods in embodied scene understanding.
TABLE XIII: Comparison of path planning and navigation
methods for VLN agents. ✓indicates feature presence.
Method
Spatial Reasoning
CoT Reasoning
Domain Adapt.
Hallucination Mitig.
Hierarchical Planning
Mapping/Pre-map
NavVLM [38]
✓
✗
✗
✗
✗
✗
SpatialCoT [211]
✓
✓
✗
✗
✗
✗
NavCoT [39]
✓
✓
✓
✗
✗
✗
FlexVLN [212]
✓
✓
✓
✓
✗
✗
NavA3 [213]
✓
✗
✗
✗
✓
✗
TopV-Nav [214]
✓
✗
✗
✗
✗
✓
BrainNav [215]
✓
✗
✗
✗
✓
✓
3) Path Planning and Navigation for VLN Agents: VLN
agents must combine perception, reasoning, and planning to
execute goal-directed navigation from natural-language in-
structions, as in Table XIII. LLMs often serve as the high-
level planners in these systems. NAVVLM [38] employs a
VLM as the cognitive core, interpreting language goals and
guiding exploration through semantic understanding of the en-
vironment. To enhance spatial reasoning, SPATIALCOT [211]
introduces bi-directional spatial coordinate alignment and
Chain-of-Thought grounding, improving reasoning accuracy
and interpretability.
Addressing
domain
adaptation,
NAVCOT
[39]
uses
parameter-efficient
adaptation
to
enable
self-guided
navigation, generating coherent reasoning chains aligned
with downstream planning. To reduce hallucinated plans,
FLEXVLN [212] validates LLM-generated guidance through
an auxiliary MLLM, ensuring action feasibility. For long-
horizon tasks, NAVA3 [213] adopts a hierarchical framework: a
reasoning VLM identifies target regions, and a pointing VLM
performs fine-grained localization via spatial affordances.
Mapping-based approaches further improve navigation.
TOPV-NAV [214] constructs adaptive top-view maps using
visual prompts, providing structured spatial priors for rea-
soning. BRAINNAV [215] integrates dual maps (coordinate
and topological) and dual orientations (relative and absolute),
enabling real-time navigation with dynamic scene updates.
Insights & Discussion. Recent methods enhance VLN agents
by combining LLM-based planning with spatial grounding,
domain adaptation, and hallucination mitigation. Structured
spatial priors further support real-time reasoning. Future ef-
forts should unify spatial perception and language reasoning
for generalizable, low-supervision navigation.
TABLE XIV: Comparison of representative methods for Em-
bodied Question Answering (EQA). ✓indicates the method
supports or explicitly incorporates the feature.
Method
Open-Vocab
3D Scene Graph
CoT Reasoning
RL
Modular Percept.
Majumdar et al. [40]
✓
✗
✗
✗
✗
Tan et al. [216]
✗
✓
✗
✗
✗
Hao et al. [41]
✗
✗
✓
✗
✗
Zhao et al. [217]
✗
✗
✓
✓
✓
C. Multimodal Spatial Reasoning in Other Embodied Tasks
1) Embodied Question Answering (EQA): EQA, first pro-
posed by Das et al. [218], has become a central benchmark
in embodied AI and robotics. In this task, an agent receives
a natural-language question—e.g., “Is there a sofa in the
living room?”—and must explore the environment, gather
visual evidence, and provide an answer. The challenge lies
in grounding language to spatial perception and reasoning.
Majumdar et al. [40] developed an open-vocabulary EQA
dataset to evaluate foundation models, revealing that current
systems struggle with spatial queries requiring object-level
and scene-level understanding. To improve spatial reasoning,
Tan et al. [216] introduced a 3D scene graph as an external
memory, enabling the model to retain and reason over spatial
layouts across multiple turns, significantly improving multi-
step QA efficiency. Hao et al. [41] advanced this direction by
integrating Chain-of-Thought (CoT) reasoning within the Em-
bosr framework, allowing structured spatial inference across
complex 3D scenarios. Zhao et al. [217] further decoupled
perception and reasoning by assigning visual understand-
ing to large-scale VLMs and using a lightweight language
model, optimized via reinforcement learning, for reasoning.
Incorporating a slow-thinking mechanism enhances depth and
reliability in spatial reasoning.
Insights & Discussion. EQA task highlights the intricate inter-
play between language grounding, visual perception, and spa-
tial reasoning in interactive environments. A key insight from
recent advances is that bridging the gap between low-level
visual inputs and high-level task understanding requires com-
bining the strong perceptual capabilities of foundation models
with explicit reasoning mechanisms, such as scene graphs,
neural program synthesis, and chain-of-thought prompting.
Future efforts may benefit from further aligning spatial repre-
sentations with language semantics and enhancing the memory
efficiency of agents in multi-turn reasoning settings.


18
2) Embodied Grasping: Robotic grasping in cluttered en-
vironments remains difficult due to occlusions and complex
object interactions, demanding fine-grained spatial reasoning.
THINKGRASP [42] introduces goal-driven language prompts
that help identify and prioritize obstructing objects, enabling
grasp planning even for heavily occluded targets. FREE-
GRASP [43] represents objects as discrete keypoints and
overlays visual markers to enhance GPT-4o’s zero-shot spatial
reasoning. AFFORDGRASP [219] integrates GPT-4o for in-
context affordance reasoning, predicting graspable parts and
intended functions, which are grounded using VLPart and
Grounded-SAM for part-conditioned optimization. Similarly,
UNIDIFFGRASP [220] leverages GPT-4o to infer target se-
mantics and functional parts from user input, combining multi-
stage segmentation and diffusion-based sampling for dual-arm
grasp generation in complex scenes.
Insights & Discussion. Cluttered environments, frequent ob-
ject occlusions, and the need to follow strict temporal and
spatial action sequences constitute the primary challenges in
embodied grasping tasks. In such settings, spatial reasoning
plays a particularly critical role. Using visual observations
effectively and appropriately integrating the reasoning capa-
bilities of VLMs are key to addressing these challenges.
3) Embodied World Models: Embodied world models sim-
ulate the dynamics of physical environments, supporting policy
learning, data-driven simulation, and long-horizon planning.
However, models relying solely on 2D pixel observations often
fail to capture accurate spatial relationships, leading to incom-
plete scene representations and weak depth or pose estimation.
Structurally consistent scene generation is therefore crucial for
effective spatial reasoning and world modeling.
EVA [48] integrates a video generation model with a vi-
sual–language model, combining reasoning with high-quality
video synthesis. TESSERACT [47] simulates temporal evolu-
tion in 3D environments, enabling realistic interactions such
as object manipulation and drawer opening while maintain-
ing spatial–temporal consistency across RGB-DN sequences.
More recently, 3DFLOWACTION [221] predicts object-level
scene flow for manipulation and employs GPT-4o [222] to
verify task completion by aligning rendered final states with
language descriptions, linking physical dynamics with seman-
tic evaluation.
Insights & Discussion. Embodied world models form the
foundation for large-scale simulation data used to train em-
bodied agents. Ensuring geometric and spatial consistency in
these generated environments is critical for supporting accurate
spatial reasoning and realistic embodied intelligence.
VI. SPATIAL REASONING WITH VIDEO AND AUDIO
A. Spatial Reasoning with Video
Video inherently captures more information about a scene
than static images, leading to significant research into the spa-
tial reasoning capabilities of MLLMs. Extending the reasoning
abilities from image-based tasks to video-based understanding
opens exciting new possibilities. However, accurately reason-
ing about spatial properties and establishing correspondences
in dynamic, temporal scenes remains a persistent challenge. As
proposed by Spatial-R1 [3], seven critical spatial reasoning
tasks are essential in this domain: object relative distance,
object size estimation, room size estimation, object relative
direction, object appearance order, object absolute distance,
and object counting.
We systematically review this emerging area and summarize
the key characteristics of the existing methods, as shown in
Tab. XV. Recent work has explored specialized architectures
and training strategies to enhance spatial reasoning capabilities
in MLLMs. A representative example is Spatial-R1 [? ], which
proposes fine-tuning vision-language models with reinforce-
ment signals grounded in spatial consistency. This training
encourages the model to align outputs with the underlying
3D or 2D geometry implied by the video. SpaceR [3] further
refines this approach by injecting positional tokens derived
from visual object tracking, enabling improved frame-to-frame
localization. Other works introduce complementary strategies.
R1-Zero-like training [117] builds on reinforcement objec-
tives to penalize spatial hallucinations and reward temporally
stable spatial predictions. ST-Think [109] introduces a dual-
modality backbone that processes egocentric video using both
motion and layout cues, enabling 4D (space-time) reason-
ing through transformer modules. Similarly, Video-R1 [16]
augments the visual encoder with spatial maps derived from
frame-wise geometric analysis, and uses spatial alignment
loss to preserve inter-frame consistency. LLaVA-ST [108]
and VideoINSTA [50] adopt an orthogonal approach: they
focus on instruction tuning with spatial-temporal prompts,
encouraging zero-shot understanding of video-level concepts
like object permanence and navigational intent. These models
rely on vision encoders (typically CLIP variants) that preserve
spatial resolution via patch-wise tokenization. In Thinking in
Space [8], spatial memory is modeled explicitly through a
recurrent memory cache, allowing the LLM to recall visual
states at earlier timestamps for long-horizon reasoning. A
benchmark-centric perspective is introduced by V-STaR [225],
which offers a suite of probing tasks to evaluate spatial
reasoning across different axes: motion tracking, occlusion
recovery, topological layout understanding, and cross-frame
object matching. Coarse Correspondence [223] complements
this with a strategy that boosts spatial alignment across frames
via coarse-to-fine token matching, improving temporal co-
herence in reasoning chains. Lastly, Aether [224] proposes
geometric-aware world modeling through unified token rep-
resentations that encode both position and object identity,
enabling downstream LLMs to simulate spatial transitions with
minimal hallucination.
Insights & Discussion. Recent progress in multimodal spatial
reasoning demonstrates the growing capability of MLLMs to
handle structured space-time understanding. However, chal-
lenges remain: models often lose spatial detail due to token
compression and lack mechanisms for robust spatial memory.
Solutions such as marker-based overlays (as in MPDrive-
style approaches) and coordinate-augmented prompts (as in
LocVLM [126]) provide partial remedies, but fall short in
generalizing across diverse video domains. Egocentric video
in particular poses unique difficulties for multimodal spatial
reasoning: distinguishing between agent motion and object


19
TABLE XV: Comparison of recent multimodal spatial reasoning methods in video QA.
Year
Task
Dataset
Benchmark
Method
Spatial Components
Code
Arxiv 2024
MCVQA, OEVQA, etc
-
-
VideoLLaMA2 [49]
Convolution Connector
link
ACL 2024
Long Video-QA
-
-
VideoINSTA [50]
Content-based Reasoning
link
Arxiv 2024
ScanQA, OpenEQA
-
-
Coarse Correspondence [223]
Lightweight tracking model
-
Arxiv 2024
Video-QA
VSI-Bench
VSI-Bench[8]
-
-
link
Arxiv 2025
Video-QA
Video-R1
-
Video-R1 [16]
GRPO
link
Arxiv 2025
Depth Estimation
-
-
AETHER [224]
-
link
Arxiv 2025
RSTR
-
V-STaR [225]
-
-
link
Arxiv 2025
Video-QA
SpaceR-151k
-
SpaceR [3]
Task-Specific GRPO Training
link
Arxiv 2025
Video-QA
Ego-ST Bench
Ego-ST Bench
ST-R1 [109]
Long-CoT and GRPO
link
TABLE XVI: Comparison of recent multimodal spatial reasoning methods in audio.
Year
Task
Benchmark
Method
Spatial Components
Code
NeurIPS 2023
Audio-Visual Sound Localization and Detection
STARSS23 [51]
-
-
-
ICML 2024
Audio-QA
SpatialSoundQA [52]
BAT
Spatial Audio Encoder, Curriculum Learning
link
ICML 2025
Audio-QA
AQAPHY
ACORN [53]
Fundamental Physical Phenomena
-
Arxiv 2025
Audio-Visual-QA
SAVVY-Bench
SAVVY [54]
Spatial Tracks and Global Map Construction
link
Audio
How would you describe 
the location of the sound?
Audio
Encoder
Language
Encoder
Video
(optional)
Visual
Encoder
LLM
The sound is from …
Spatial Reasoning with Audio
Fig. 10: Spatial reasoning from audio & video with MLLMs.
motion requires grounded scene representations and persistent
memory. While early efforts such as ST-Think and Thinking in
Space offer promising architectures, scalable and generalizable
spatial world models remain an open research area.
B. Spatial Reasoning with Audio
Audio spatial reasoning is the process of interpreting spatial
cues from sound, such as direction of arrival, source location,
and distance, to infer the physical context of an auditory scene.
While human listeners effortlessly localize and segregate
sounds using binaural cues, current multimodal large language
models (MLLMs) have primarily focused on what is heard
(the content) rather than where it is heard from [226]. This
lack of spatial awareness limits applications such as audio-
visual navigation and egocentric perception, where an AI agent
must infer where a sound originates to interact effectively
with its environment. To bridge this gap, recent research [51–
54, 226, 227] has begun to explore spatial reasoning capabili-
ties by training large-scale multimodal models that learn from
audio-only or audio-visual inputs.
We systematically review this emerging area and summarize
the key characteristics of recently proposed methods, as shown
in Tab. XVI. STARSS23 [51] introduces an audio-visual
sound event localization and detection (SELD) task, along
with the STARSS23 audio-visual dataset to support spatial
reasoning for SELD. SpatialSoundQA [52] is the first large-
scale benchmark focused on spatial audio question answering
(Audio-QA). It includes over 21, 000 simulated binaural audio
clips rendered in 3D environments, accompanied by diverse
questions involving directionality, distance estimation, and
multi-source spatial reasoning. Architecturally, the proposed
BAT model combines a spatial audio encoder with a large
language model (LLM) and employs curriculum learning to
gradually enhance the model’s spatial reasoning capabilities.
ACORN [53] also addresses Audio-QA by introducing the
AQAPHY benchmark. Technically, it improves an LLM’s
spatial reasoning by incorporating fundamental physical phe-
nomena such as the Doppler effect, multipath propagation, and
spatial relationships. More recently, SAVVY [54] has emerged
as a prominent testbed for spatial reasoning that integrates both
audio and visual cues, i.e., audio-visual question answering
(Audio-Visual-QA). Specifically, SAVVY presents SAVVY-
Bench, which evaluates 3D spatial reasoning in dynamic
scenes with synchronized spatial audio, and proposes to en-
hance spatial understanding by first extracting spatial tracks
and then constructing a global spatial map. These benchmarks
collectively advance standardized evaluation for audio spatial
reasoning and enable quantitative comparison across MLLMs
with varying degrees of spatial awareness. It is worth noting
that other Audio-QA and Audio-Visual-QA methods, such
as SARI [228], Meerkat [229], and EchoInk-R1 [230], are
not discussed here as they do not specifically address spatial
reasoning.
Insights & Discussion. Despite recent progress, significant
challenges remain for robust audio spatial reasoning. Current
models still struggle to generalize in open-world scenarios
with multiple, dynamic sound sources. These limitations are


20
Authors
Venue/Date
Paper Link
Code
Input Modality
Feng et al.
Arxiv 2025 (Mar)
P
§
Image-Text
Imran Kabir et al.
Arxiv 2025 (Mar)
P
§
Video-Text
Peiran Wu et al.
Arxiv 2025 (Mar)
P
/
Video-Text
Ziyue Wang et al.
Arxiv 2025 (Mar)
P
§
Image-Text
Jonathan Roberts et al.
Arxiv 2025 (Feb)
P
§
Image-Text
Mingjie Xu et al.
WACV 2025
P
§
Graph-Desc/QA/Conv
Hongyu Li et al.
Arxiv 2025 (Jan)
P
§
Video-Text(QA)
Yang et al.
CVPR 2025
P
§
Video-Text(QA)
Xingrui Wang et al.
CVPR 2025
P
§
Image-Text
Liao et al.
Arxiv 2025 (Apl)
P
§
Video-Text(QA)
Chengzu Li et al.
Arxiv 2025 (Jan)
P
/
Image-Text
Huanqia Cai et al.
Arxiv 2025 (Feb)
P
§
Image-Text
Siyu Wang et al.
AAAI 2025
P
§
CAD-Text
Navid Rajabi et al.
NIPS 2024 Workshop
P
/
Image-Text(QA)
Chonghao Sima et al.
ECCV 2024
P
§
Image/Graph-Text(QA)
Ivan Majic et al.
GeoAI 2024
P
§
Image-Text
Li Xuan et al.
IOTMMIM 24
P
/
Image-Text
Yew Ken Chia et al.
ACL 2024
P
§
Image-Text
Xiao Liu et al.
ACL 2022
P
§
Image-Text
Roshanak Mirzaee et al.
NAACL 2021
P
§
Text
Yu-Chuan Su et al.
Arxiv 2021(Apr)
P
§
Image-Text
Letitia Parcalabescu et al.
ACL 2022
P
§
Image-Text
Liu et al.
TACL 2023
P
§
Image-Text
Ramakrishnan et al.
Arxiv 2024 (Oct)
P
/
Image-Text
TABLE XVII: General MLLM: Benchmarks and Datasets
further compounded by the scarcity of large-scale, high-
quality spatial audio datasets with precise annotations, which
makes it difficult to train models that perform well outside of
controlled or simulated environments. To bridge these gaps,
promising directions include the development of richer data
collection pipelines, such as real-world egocentric recordings
or improved simulation techniques that better approximate
real acoustic conditions. In parallel, more specialized model
architectures are expected to emerge to effectively leverage
these spatial cues. By addressing both data and modeling
challenges, future systems may achieve human-like “spatial
hearing”, reasoning not only about what is heard but also
where it occurs within complex, dynamic scenes.
VII. BENCHMARKS
Multimodal spatial reasoning enables AI systems to under-
stand and infer spatial relationships within scenes by integrat-
ing information from multiple modalities, such as vision and
language. Initially, benchmarks and datasets focused on simple
scenes and basic spatial relations. However, as multimodal
foundation models evolved, the focus shifted to more complex
reasoning and cross-modal inference. Before these models,
research was constrained to environments with basic spatial
tasks, such as determining relative object positions in visual
question answering (VQA). With the rise of powerful pre-
trained models, new benchmarks were developed to address
greater openness, richer complexity, and deeper reasoning
capabilities. These efforts span domains like panoramic im-
agery, video, computer-aided design (CAD), and geographic
information systems (GIS), advancing AI systems in scene
understanding. Figure 11 illustrates the development of mul-
timodal spatial reasoning benchmarks. This section provides
an overview of the evolution of datasets and benchmarks,
highlighting key stages, modality types, and domain coverage,
with a focus on those from the foundation model era.
A. Early Multimodal Spatial Reasoning Benchmarks
Before the advent of large-scale multimodal foundation
models, early research in spatial reasoning relied heavily on
datasets focused on natural images paired with textual descrip-
tions. These datasets aimed to tackle basic spatial reasoning
tasks, such as object localization and relationship detection.
A pivotal benchmark in this domain is the Visual Genome
dataset [231], which provides annotated images and graphs to
depict spatial relationships between objects, facilitating image-
text question answering tasks. Another significant contribution
is SpatialSense [232], which contains a wide variety of spatial
relationships, promoting tasks that involve misclassification-
prone scenarios. Similarly, TVQA+ [233] combines video
clips with object detection annotations, requiring models to
answer questions that involve both spatial and temporal rea-
soning. The 2.5VRD dataset [234] focuses on fine-grained vi-
sual relationship detection using triplet annotations, capturing
spatial relationships between objects.
Additionally, the VALSE benchmark [235], though not
solely designed for spatial reasoning, includes rich annotations
of spatial relationships and actions, providing an excellent re-
source for evaluating models’ vision-language grounding capa-


21
Visual Genome
Stanford
2016.02
SpatialSense
Princeton
2019.08
TVQA+
UNC-Chapel Hill
2019.04
Image-Text-Graph
2D-Image-Text
Video-Text
2.5VRD
Google Research
2021.04
VALSE
Uni Heidelberg
2021.12
VSR
Cambridge
2022.05
What’s Up
UCLA
2023.10
DriveMLLM
WHU
2024.11
SPACE
Apple
2024.10
BLINK
UPENN
2024.04
SpatialEval
MSR
2024.06
GSR-Bench
GMU
2024.06
SpatialVLM
DeepMind
2024.01
3D-Image-Text
SAT
BU
2024.12
SpatialRGPT
UCSD
2024.06
Spatial457
JHU
2025.02
VIS-100k
SJTU
2025.04
VIS-Bench
NYU
2024.12
SpaceR-151k
PKU
2025.04
ST-Align
Meituan
2025.01
Ego-ST
X-Intellignece
2025.03
V-STaR
QMUL
2025.03
Other Modal
CityGPT
THU
2024.06
CAD-GPT
SJTU
2024.04
SpaceSGG
CityUHK
2024.12
MM-Escape
THU
2025.03
Audio-Video
STARSS23
Sony
2023.06
SpatialSoundQA
UTEXAS
2024.02
Audio-Text
SAVVY
UW
2025.06
Audio-Video-Text
ERQA
DeepMind
2025.03
MVoT
MSR
2025.01
Video-R1
CUHK
2025.03
AQAPHY
NIO
2025.06
OmniSpatial
THU
2025.06
Fig. 11: The chronological progression of multimodal spatial reasoning benchmarks. Each colored marker represents a distinct
benchmark, with hue variations indicating different modality combinations (e.g., image-text-graph, audio-video). The timeline
illustrates the evolution of assessment methodologies and the increasing complexity of spatial reasoning evaluation frameworks.
bilities. Further contributions, such as the VSR dataset [236],
define explicit spatial reasoning tasks, while datasets like
COCO-Spatial in What’sUp [237] examine the limitations of
pre-trained models on spatial reasoning. These early bench-
marks, while focused on basic spatial cognition, set the foun-
dation for more advanced tasks, sparking further developments
in multimodal spatial reasoning for large-scale models.
B. Image-Text Spatial Reasoning Benchmarks
With the rise of large-scale multimodal foundation models
(MLLMs), spatial reasoning tasks have expanded into various
domains. This section discusses the evolution of 2D spatial
reasoning benchmarks, categorizing them based on task ob-
jectives and methodologies.
1) 2D Spatial Reasoning Tasks:
2D spatial reasoning
benchmarks evaluate models’ ability to reason about spatial
relationships in two-dimensional settings, focusing on tasks
like navigation, object localization, and layout generation. A
key trend is the integration of multimodal data, combining
visual and textual information for enhanced reasoning. For
example, DriveMLLM [238] annotates spatial relationships
in driving scenarios using question-answer pairs, assessing
navigation understanding. SpatialEval [239] provides synthetic
images with spatial tasks, such as Spatial-Map and Maze-
Nav, testing relative object positioning in controlled settings.
The SPACE benchmark [204] offers both large-scale and
small-scale tasks, from layout understanding to viewpoint
transformations, evaluating models’ ability to handle diverse
spatial challenges.
2) Hybrid Approaches and Abstract Representations: Some
datasets explore abstract representations. VSR [236] provides
annotations for spatial positional relationships, testing complex
spatial reasoning. Datasets like COCO-Spatial [237] introduce
spatial tasks that involve context, navigation, and dynamic
reasoning. Other benchmarks, such as OmniSpatial [96] and
GSR-Bench [240], enhance real-world relevance, offering
comprehensive evaluations in areas like autonomous driving
and robotics. OmniSpatial tests tasks like dynamic reasoning,
traffic analysis, and geometric decomposition, reflecting real-
world spatial complexities.
3) Insights & Discussion: 2D spatial reasoning datasets
have evolved from simple image-text pairs to multi-task frame-
works evaluating diverse reasoning abilities. Recent datasets
emphasize multimodal data, combining visual and textual
information for complex reasoning. Although synthetic data
accelerates benchmarking, it faces challenges in generaliza-
tion and real-world applicability. Future benchmarks should
integrate dynamic real-world data and hybrid datasets com-
bining synthetic and real data to better cover edge cases and
enhance evaluation. These advancements will enable more
capable models for autonomous navigation, robotics, and other
complex applications.
4) 3D Spatial Reasoning Benchmarks: The development
of 3D spatial reasoning datasets has significantly advanced in
recent years. Boyuan Chen et al.introduced the first 3D spatial
reasoning dataset [15], incorporating depth-aware reasoning
into multimodal systems. To evaluate MLLMs on dynamic
spatial reasoning tasks, Arijit Ray et al.proposed the SAT
dataset [110], which includes simulated 3D scenes for training


22
and real-world environments for testing. This dataset, using 3D
scene simulations, improves model performance on dynamic
spatial reasoning tasks through real-world evaluation.
To further address gaps in 3D spatial reasoning, An-
Chieh Cheng et al.introduced SpatialRGPT-Bench [18], which
generates 3D reasoning tasks grounded in 2D scenes. Their
pipeline combines instance segmentation and depth estimation
to construct tasks such as object size, height, and relative
distance estimation using only 2D inputs. Additionally, Xin-
grui Wang et al.developed the Spatial457 dataset [241] for 6D
spatial reasoning, covering 3D localization, orientations, and
multi-object relationships, further assessing the performance
of MLLMs on these complex tasks.
Insights & Discussion. The introduction of 3D spatial rea-
soning benchmarks has brought significant advances, espe-
cially in data generation. Synthesis-driven annotation meth-
ods and automated 2D-to-3D conversion pipelines have al-
leviated annotation challenges. As tasks evolve, they have
shifted from basic orientation and static perception to dynamic
scene understanding and multi-perspective reasoning, increas-
ing cognitive complexity. Furthermore, evaluation frameworks
have transitioned from simulation-based training to real-world
scenario validation, establishing closed-loop paradigms for
performance assessment. Despite these advances, challenges
remain, particularly in cross-modal alignment and adapting to
dynamic scenes, highlighting the need for continued research
in these areas.
C. Video-Text Spatial Reasoning Benchmarks
Recent advancements in video-text spatial reasoning have
led to the development of diverse benchmarks aimed at sys-
tematically evaluating spatial understanding capabilities. These
benchmarks have evolved from fundamental perceptual tasks
to more complex spatiotemporal tasks. Current benchmarks
increasingly emphasize the integration of temporal and spatial
cues, leveraging both synthetic and annotated data to support
model training and evaluation. The following sections provide
a detailed overview of these benchmarks, categorized by task
type and complexity, highlighting their contributions in vedio-
text spatial reasoning.
1) Fundamental Spatial Perception Tasks: Benchmarks in
this category evaluate core spatial perception skills such as
object counting, relative direction, and distance estimation.
VIS-100K [117] introduces 100,000 video–question–answer
pairs spanning six spatial reasoning tasks—object count, rela-
tive/absolute distance, relative direction, object size, and room
size. Fine-tuning MLLMs on this dataset demonstrates that the
GRPO reinforcement algorithm effectively enhances spatial
reasoning performance. VIS-BENCH [8] further examines how
MLLMs memorize and reason about spatial layouts. Built
from 288 annotated indoor videos, it includes 5,000 QA pairs
covering eight tasks such as distance, direction, path planning,
and order of appearance, offering a detailed analysis of spatial
understanding. SPACER-151K [3] expands this scope with
151K samples, including 91K spatial QA pairs and 60K
general video understanding examples. Each task incorporates
precise spatial metadata (e.g., bounding boxes, temporal in-
dices) and 10×10 grid maps encoding object distributions.
TABLE
XVIII:
Performance
comparison
on
Video–Text
Spatial
Reasoning
Benchmarks
(reported
pairs
only).
Metrics
follow
the
originals:
SPATIALRGPT-BENCH—Success
Rate;
BLINK—Accuracy
(spatial
subset);
SPATIALEVAL—Accuracy
(0–1);
DRIVEMLLM—Zero-shot
Score;
SAT—Accuracy
on
Real/Synthetic.
Benchmark
Metric
Model
Value
SPATIALRGPT-BENCH [18]
Success Rate
LLaVA-v1.6-34B [242]
43.98
Success Rate
GPT-4V [243]
58.14
BLINK (spatial) [244]
Acc.
LLaVA-v1.6-34B [242]
76.22
Acc.
InstructBLIP-Vicuna-7B [245]
55.24
Acc.
InstructBLIP-Vicuna-13B [245]
64.34
Acc.
Gemini-Pro [246]
67.13
Acc.
GPT-4V [243]
72.03
Acc.
GPT-4o [243]
76.92
SPATIALEVAL [239]
Acc. (0–1)
LLaVA-v1.6-Mistral-7B [242]
0.33
Acc. (0–1)
LLaVA-v1.6-Vicuna-7B [242]
0.24
Acc. (0–1)
LLaVA-v1.6-Vicuna-13B [242]
0.38
Acc. (0–1)
LLaVA-v1.6-34B [242]
0.42
Acc. (0–1)
InstructBLIP-Vicuna-7B [245]
0.24
Acc. (0–1)
InstructBLIP-Vicuna-13B [245]
0.27
Acc. (0–1)
Gemini-Pro [246]
0.687
Acc. (0–1)
GPT-4V [243]
0.924
DRIVEMLLM [238]
Score (ZS)
LLaVA-v1.6-Mistral-7B [242]
38.20
Score (ZS)
LLaVA-v1.6-Vicuna-7B [242]
38.20
Score (ZS)
LLaVA-v1.6-Vicuna-13B [242]
38.20
Score (ZS)
LLaVA-ov-7B [247]
22.29
Score (ZS)
LLaVA-ov-72B [247]
21.10
Score (ZS)
Qwen2-VL-7B [248]
21.17
Score (ZS)
Qwen2-VL-72B [248]
20.11
Score (ZS)
Qwen-VL [249]
36.50
Score (ZS)
mPLUG-Owl2 [250]
33.90
Score (ZS)
InstructBLIP-Vicuna-7B [245]
42.80
Score (ZS)
InstructBLIP-Vicuna-13B [245]
42.80
Score (ZS)
Gemini-1.5-flash [251]
54.03
Score (ZS)
Gemini-Pro [246]
40.10
Score (ZS)
GPT-4V [243]
51.70
Score (ZS)
GPT-4o [243]
25.63
SAT [110]
Acc. (Real)
Gemini-1.5-flash [251]
57.60
Acc. (Synthetic)
Gemini-1.5-flash [251]
50.00
Acc. (Real)
Gemini-1.5-Pro [251]
64.80
Acc. (Synthetic)
Gemini-1.5-Pro [251]
49.90
Acc. (Real)
GPT-4V [243]
50.70
Acc. (Synthetic)
GPT-4V [243]
44.80
Acc. (Real)
GPT-4o [243]
57.50
Acc. (Synthetic)
GPT-4o [243]
49.40
Rigorous quality control ensures balanced, unambiguous data,
establishing a new large-scale benchmark for spatial reasoning
in multimodal systems.
2) Advanced
Spatiotemporal
Reasoning
Tasks:
These
benchmarks extend spatial reasoning to dynamic tasks such as
path planning and cross-modal coordination, emphasizing tem-
poral consistency and causal reasoning. ST-ALIGN [108] es-
tablishes a unified framework for fine-grained spatiotemporal
reasoning with three tasks: Spatial-Temporal Video Ground-
ing (STVG), Event Localization and Captioning (ELC), and
Spatial Video Grounding (SVG). It jointly evaluates spatial
and temporal localization, advancing beyond datasets focused
on isolated spatial or temporal cues. EGO-ST [109] addresses
the overlooked role of temporal dynamics by introducing
reverse egocentric reasoning. Comprising over 5,000 QA pairs


23
across four tasks—route description, directional change, land-
mark transition, and action shift—it systematically evaluates
how MLLMs integrate dynamic spatial cues and temporal
order. V-STAR [225] targets the gap between object-centric
and temporal reasoning. Its core Reverse Spatio-Temporal
Reasoning (RSTR) task links “What→When→Where” and
“What→Where→When” chains to assess logical consistency,
using the Logarithmic Geometric Mean (LGM) metric to
jointly measure accuracy, temporal IoU, and spatial IoU. It
establishes the first standardized benchmark for comprehen-
sive spatiotemporal reasoning in Video-LLMs. Overall, these
datasets advance spatial intelligence evaluation from static
spatial perception to dynamic, temporally grounded reason-
ing—crucial for realistic embodied and video understanding.
3) Mixed-Task Benchmarking:
This class of evaluation
benchmarks incorporates diverse data sources and tasks of
varying difficulty levels to provide a comprehensive assess-
ment of model capabilities. Due to the scarcity of high-
quality video reasoning data, current MLLMs exhibit limited
spatial reasoning capabilities in video contexts. To address this
issue, Feng et al.introduced two datasets: Video-R1-COT-165k
and Video-R1-260k[16]. The former contains CoT annotated
samples generated from both image and video inputs, serving
as a cold-start dataset for supervised fine-tuning. The latter
is designed for reinforcement learning training, comprising
a mix of image and video data to enable models to acquire
general reasoning skills from static images and transfer them to
dynamic video contexts through a hybrid training strategy. Al-
though only about 8% of the samples in these datasets involve
explicit spatial reasoning tasks, the inclusion of complete CoT
annotations offers valuable resources for advancing research
on spatial reasoning in video-based settings.
Insights
&
Discussion. Current visual-spatial reasoning
benchmarks are advancing from static attribute recognition
toward dynamic spatiotemporal coupling, demanding pro-
gressively higher spatial cognitive capabilities from models;
however, they remain constrained by limitations including pro-
hibitive annotation costs restricting dataset scalability, incon-
sistent quality in semi-automated multimodal LLM-generated
annotations, and overly homogeneous templated data that
inadequately fosters profound spatial cognition—necessitating
a paradigm shift from isolated data curation to synergistic
algorithm-data co-design, from single-modality datasets to
multi-source hybrid data frameworks, and from superficial
pattern matching to causal inference incorporating physical
constraints like gravitational collision dynamics.
D. Other Modal Benchmarks
Additional multimodal benchmarks extend spatial reasoning
beyond vision–language inputs. For audio–visual spatial rea-
soning, related datasets and evaluation protocols are detailed
in Section VI-B. CITYINSTRUCTION and CITYEVAL, released
with CITYGPT [107], evaluate spatial reasoning, navigation,
and path generation in realistic urban scenes. CAD-GPT [178]
introduces a dataset pairing natural language descriptions
and single-view images with CAD modeling sequences, en-
abling multimodal 3D model synthesis and benchmarking.
SGG [252] provides structured scene graphs and 3D point
clouds fused with LLM-generated question–answer dialogues,
supporting open-vocabulary spatial reasoning across complex
visual layouts. Finally, MM-ESCAPE [253] simulates an inter-
active escape-room environment where models must perform
sequential spatial reasoning and actions to exit, offering a
novel framework for evaluating goal-driven reasoning in dy-
namic scenes.
Insights & Discussion. Contemporary multimodal spatial
reasoning datasets exhibit a tripartite evolution—progressing
from scene-driven construction to task sophistication and
evaluation closure—where real-world task demands grow in-
creasingly complex, modalities diversify, and spatial reasoning
advances beyond basic directional perception toward causal
spatial inference chains. Nevertheless, persistent gaps remain
in establishing a unified framework that ensures physical
plausibility, enables action verifiability, and maintains cost-
effective data curation, indicating considerable scope for ad-
vancement in multimodal spatial reasoning data infrastructure.
VIII. CHALLENGES AND FUTURE DIRECTIONS
Multimodal Spatial Reasoning in Egocentric Vision. While
existing research on spatial reasoning in MLLMs primarily
focuses on third-person perspectives, there is a growing need to
explore egocentric vision, where spatial reasoning must occur
from the agent’s first-person viewpoint [254–256]. This shift
introduces unique challenges, such as the agent’s movement,
limited field of view, and the temporally evolving nature of
the environment. In egocentric vision, spatial reasoning must
account for dynamic changes in both the agent’s position and
the environment. Future research should focus on developing
MLLMs capable of understanding object relationships from
shifting viewpoints, inferring navigation intent, and reasoning
about interaction affordances. A promising direction lies in
creating models that can more effectively simulate and un-
derstand embodied behaviors, leading to more grounded, real-
world intelligence.
Multimodal Spatial Reasoning in 3D Vision. Despite
progress, current 3D MLLMs face challenges in scalability
and interpretability due to the inherent complexity of 3D
data. Additionally, the scarcity of large-scale annotated 3D
datasets constrains the development of robust models. To
address these challenges, future research should focus on
the development of unified and efficient 3D representations
that are both interpretable and scalable. Furthermore, training
strategies that do not rely on large-scale annotated datasets,
such as leveraging synthetic data, could offer valuable insights.
By exploring the integration of symbolic reasoning into the
3D domain, researchers can ensure better handling of spatial
relationships and improve model performance across unseen
environments. A key goal should be creating frameworks that
combine efficient 3D learning with strong temporal and causal
reasoning capabilities to model dynamic spatial environments.
Multimodal Spatial Reasoning in Embodied AI. Current
methods for spatial reasoning in embodied AI often struggle
to generalize to novel environments and are prone to spurious
or hallucinated spatial inferences. Explicit reasoning modules,


24
while improving inter-pretability, tend to increase inference
overhead and still fall short in maintaining long-term spatial
consistency. To advance this field, future research must fo-
cus on closer integration between perception and reasoning,
ensuring that spatial models maintain both geometric fidelity
and temporal consistency. Additionally, creating world models
that combine sensory inputs (e.g., visual, auditory, tactile) with
structured scene representations could allow for more robust
spatial reasoning in dynamic environments. Scalable training
strategies that incorporate symbolic and structured reasoning,
along with the ability to perform causal inference over time,
will be crucial in achieving long-term success in this area.
Multimodal Spatial Reasoning with Novel Sensors. Emerg-
ing sensor technologies such as omnidirectional cameras [69,
70, 257], event cameras, LiDAR, thermal, and radar sensors
offer complementary spatial information under challenging
conditions like adverse lighting, weather, and high-speed mo-
tion [258]. However, these sensors introduce new challenges,
including equirectangular distortions, orientation ambiguities,
sparse and asynchronous data, and noise in radar and thermal
signals. MLLMs, which are typically optimized for perspective
RGB images, must evolve to effectively integrate and process
these diverse modalities. Future research should focus on
developing methods for fusing these heterogeneous sensor
data into a unified spatial representation [259], improving
both the accuracy and robustness of spatial reasoning. By
incorporating causal and temporal reasoning capabilities into
sensor fusion, models can better handle dynamic environments
and make more informed, context-aware decisions [260].
Moreover, training strategies that leverage both synthetic and
real-world sensor data could enhance model generalization
across different sensor modalities.
Multimodal
Spatial
Reasoning
Benchmarks.
Existing
benchmarks are limited in their scope, often suffering from
issues such as orientation under-specification, narrow modality
coverage, and restricted interaction. To address these limita-
tions, future work should focus on developing more compre-
hensive benchmarks that span a wider range of modalities
and interaction settings. This includes constructing bench-
marks that synchronize vision, depth, point clouds, panoramic
views, spatial audio, inertial signals, and topological maps,
all within a unified coordinate frame with explicit orientation
and reference-frame labels. Future benchmarks should also
focus on evaluating MLLMs’ ability to perform tasks such
as reference, navigation, inspection, and question answering
in diverse environments. The development of interpretable
evaluation frameworks that can assess both reasoning quality
and spatial accuracy, while providing clear guidance for model
improvement, will be essential. Additionally, incorporating
symbolic reasoning into these benchmarks could allow for the
assessment of structured spatial knowledge and enable better
handling of complex real-world tasks.
IX. CONCLUSION
Large multimodal reasoning models have gradually emerged
as a promising and critical solution toward achieving spa-
tial reasoning capabilities. In this paper, we focus on the
intersection of spatial reasoning and MLLMs. Firstly, based
on general spatial reasoning tasks, we systematically review
and analyze the existing research from four perspectives: test-
time scaling, post-training, model design, and explainability.
We then extend the discussion to 3D vision tasks, including
3D visual grounding, 3D scene reasoning and question an-
swering, and 3D generation. Beyond these fundamental tasks,
we further explore spatial reasoning in embodied AI, provid-
ing reviews and discussions on vision-language navigation,
embodied question answering, and related areas. Moreover,
spatial reasoning tasks involving emerging modalities such as
video and audio are also summarized, which are challenging
but crucial to building a comprehensive human-like spatial
reasoning system. In addition to methodological aspects, we
provide a comprehensive overview of datasets and bench-
marks for multimodal spatial reasoning, which constitute the
indispensable support for advancements in this field. Through
this systematic survey, we aim to establish a solid knowledge
foundation and offer new insights to this field-paving the way
toward intelligent and reliable multimodal spatial reasoning
systems in the era of large models.
REFERENCES
[1] A. Su, H. Wang, W. Ren, F. Lin, and W. Chen,
“Pixel reasoner: Incentivizing pixel-space reasoning
with curiosity-driven reinforcement learning,” arXiv
preprint arXiv:2505.15966, 2025.
[2] D. Liu, C. Wang, P. Gao, R. Zhang, X. Ma, Y. Meng,
and Z. Wang, “3daxisprompt: Promoting the 3d ground-
ing and reasoning in gpt-4o,” Neurocomputing, vol. 637,
p. 130072, 2025.
[3] K.
Ouyang,
Y.
Liu,
H.
Wu,
Y.
Liu,
H.
Zhou,
J. Zhou, F. Meng, and X. Sun, “Spacer: Reinforc-
ing mllms in video spatial reasoning,” arXiv preprint
arXiv:2504.01805, 2025.
[4] Y. Du, T. Fu, Z. Chen, B. Li, S. Su, Z. Zhao,
and C. Wang, “Vl-nav: Real-time vision-language
navigation with spatial reasoning,” arXiv preprint
arXiv:2502.00931, 2025.
[5] W. Feng, W. Zhu, T.-j. Fu, V. Jampani, A. Akula,
X. He, S. Basu, X. E. Wang, and W. Y. Wang, “Lay-
outgpt: Compositional visual planning and generation
with large language models,” Advances in Neural Infor-
mation Processing Systems, vol. 36, pp. 18 225–18 250,
2023.
[6] G. R. Team, S. Abeyruwan, J. Ainslie, J.-B. Alayrac,
M. G. Arenas, T. Armstrong, A. Balakrishna, R. Baruch,
M. Bauza, M. Blokzijl et al., “Gemini robotics:
Bringing ai into the physical world,” arXiv preprint
arXiv:2503.20020, 2025.
[7] F. Shiri, X.-Y. Guo, M. Far, X. Yu, R. Haf, and Y.-F. Li,
“An empirical analysis on spatial reasoning capabilities
of large multimodal models,” in Proceedings of the 2024
Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language
Processing, 2024, pp. 21 440–21 455.
[8] J. Yang, S. Yang, A. W. Gupta, R. Han, L. Fei-Fei,
and S. Xie, “Thinking in space: How multimodal large


25
language models see, remember, and recall spaces,”
arXiv preprint arXiv:2412.14171, 2024.
[9] W. Wu et al., “Mind’s eye of llms: Visualization-
of-thought elicits spatial reasoning in large language
models,” in Advances in Neural Information Processing
Systems (NeurIPS), 2024.
[10] H. Wu, X. Huang, Y. Chen, Y. Zhang, Y. Wang,
and W. Xie, “Spatialscore: Towards unified evaluation
for multimodal spatial understanding,” arXiv preprint
arXiv:2505.17012, 2025.
[11] C.
Ma,
K.
Lu,
T.-Y.
Cheng,
N.
Trigoni,
and
A. Markham, “Spatialpin: Enhancing spatial reason-
ing capabilities of vision-language models through
prompting and interacting 3d priors,” arXiv preprint
arXiv:2403.13438, 2024.
[12] Y. Wang, T. Zhou, Z. Peng, X. Li, Y. Chen, and X. Chen,
“Visuothink: Empowering lvlm reasoning with multi-
modal tree search,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2504.09130,
2025.
[13] I. Kabir, M. A. Reza, and S. Billah, “Logic-rag:
Augmenting large multimodal models with visual-
spatial knowledge for road scene understanding,” arXiv
preprint arXiv:2503.12663, 2025.
[14] X. Xu et al., “Multi-spatialmllm: Multi-frame spatial
understanding with multi-modal large language mod-
els,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2505.17015, 2025.
[15] B. Chen, Z. Xu, S. Kirmani, B. Ichter, D. Sadigh,
L. Guibas, and F. Xia, “Spatialvlm: Endowing vision-
language models with spatial reasoning capabilities,”
in Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Com-
puter Vision and Pattern Recognition, 2024, pp. 14 455–
14 465.
[16] K. Feng, K. Gong, B. Li, Z. Guo, Y. Wang, T. Peng,
B. Wang, and X. Yue, “Video-r1: Reinforcing video
reasoning in mllms,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2503.21776,
2025.
[17] D. Wu et al., “Spatial-mllm: Boosting mllm capabili-
ties in visual-based spatial intelligence,” arXiv preprint
arXiv:2505.23747, 2025.
[18] A.-C. Cheng, H. Yin, Y. Fu, Q. Guo, R. Yang, J. Kautz,
X. Wang, and S. Liu, “Spatialrgpt: Grounded spatial
reasoning in vision language models,” arXiv preprint
arXiv:2406.01584, 2024.
[19] P. He, Z. Zhang, Y. Zhang, X. Zhao, and S. Peng,
“Spatial-ormllm: Improve spatial relation understanding
in the operating room with multimodal large language
model,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2508.08199, 2025.
[20] Y. Qi et al., “Beyond semantics: Rediscovering spatial
awareness in vision-language models,” arXiv preprint
arXiv:2503.17349, 2025.
[21] S. Chen et al., “Why is spatial reasoning hard for vlms?
an attention mechanism perspective on focus areas,”
arXiv preprint arXiv:2503.01773, 2025.
[22] C. Wen, D. Jayaraman, and Y. Gao, “Can transform-
ers capture spatial relations between objects?” in Pro-
ceedings of the International Conference on Learning
Representations (ICLR 2024), 2024.
[23] J. Yang, X. Chen, S. Qian, N. Madaan, M. Iyengar, D. F.
Fouhey, and J. Chai, “Llm-grounder: Open-vocabulary
3d visual grounding with large language model as
an agent,” in 2024 IEEE International Conference on
Robotics and Automation (ICRA).
IEEE, 2024, pp.
7694–7701.
[24] Y. Chen, S. Yang, H. Huang, T. Wang, R. Xu, R. Lyu,
D. Lin, and J. Pang, “Grounded 3d-llm with referent
tokens,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2405.10370, 2024.
[25] R. Xu, Z. Huang, T. Wang, Y. Chen, J. Pang, and D. Lin,
“Vlm-grounder: A vlm agent for zero-shot 3d visual
grounding,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2410.13860, 2024.
[26] R. Li, S. Li, L. Kong, X. Yang, and J. Liang, “See-
ground: See and ground for zero-shot open-vocabulary
3d visual grounding,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2412.04383,
2024.
[27] Z. Liu, Y. Wang, S. Zheng, T. Pan, L. Liang, Y. Fu, and
X. Xue, “Reasongrounder: Lvlm-guided hierarchical
feature splatting for open-vocabulary 3d visual ground-
ing and reasoning,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2503.23297,
2025.
[28] C. Zhu, T. Wang, W. Zhang, J. Pang, and X. Liu, “Llava-
3d: A simple yet effective pathway to empowering lmms
with 3d-awareness,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2409.18125,
2024.
[29] T. Zemskova and D. Yudin, “3dgraphllm: Combining
semantic graphs and large language models for 3d scene
understanding,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2412.18450, 2024.
[30] S. Zhang, D. Huang, J. Deng, S. Tang, W. Ouyang,
T. He, and Y. Zhang, “Agent3d-zero: An agent for
zero-shot 3d understanding,” in European Conference
on Computer Vision.
Springer, 2024, pp. 186–202.
[31] J. Zhou, X. Li, L. Qi, and M.-H. Yang, “Layout-your-
3d: Controllable and precise 3d generation with 2d
blueprint,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2410.15391, 2024.
[32] C. Sun, J. Han, W. Deng, X. Wang, Z. Qin, and
S. Gould, “3d-gpt: Procedural 3d modeling with large
language models,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2310.12945,
2023.
[33] D. Rukhovich, E. Dupont, D. Mallis, K. Cherenkova,
A. Kacem, and D. Aouada, “Cad-recode: Reverse en-
gineering cad code from point clouds,” arXiv preprint
arXiv:2412.14042, 2024.
[34] Y. Zhang, Z. Xu, Y. Shen, P. Kordjamshidi, and
L. Huang, “Spartun3d: Situated spatial understanding
of 3d world in large language models,” arXiv preprint
arXiv:2410.03878, 2024.
[35] H. Hong, Y. Qiao, S. Wang, J. Liu, and Q. Wu, “General
scene adaptation for vision-and-language navigation,”
arXiv preprint arXiv:2501.17403, 2025.
[36] Y. Kong, D. Song, J. Liang, D. Manocha, Z. Yao,
and X. Xiao, “Autospatial: Visual-language reasoning
for social robot navigation through efficient spatial
reasoning learning,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2503.07557,
2025.
[37] S. Chen, X. Chen, C. Zhang, M. Li, G. Yu, H. Fei,
H. Zhu, J. Fan, and T. Chen, “Ll3da: Visual interactive
instruction tuning for omni-3d understanding reasoning
and planning,” in Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Con-


26
ference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition,
2024, pp. 26 428–26 438.
[38] Z. Yin, C. Cheng et al., “Navigation with vlm
framework: Go to any language,” arXiv preprint
arXiv:2410.02787, 2024.
[39] B. Lin, Y. Nie, Z. Wei, J. Chen, S. Ma, J. Han,
H. Xu, X. Chang, and X. Liang, “Navcot: Boosting
llm-based vision-and-language navigation via learning
disentangled reasoning,” IEEE Transactions on Pattern
Analysis and Machine Intelligence, 2025.
[40] A. Majumdar, A. Ajay, X. Zhang, P. Putta, S. Yena-
mandra, M. Henaff, S. Silwal, P. Mcvay, O. Maksymets,
S. Arnaud et al., “Openeqa: Embodied question answer-
ing in the era of foundation models,” in Proceedings
of the IEEE/CVF conference on computer vision and
pattern recognition, 2024, pp. 16 488–16 498.
[41] Y. Hao, F. Yang, N. Fang, and Y.-S. Liu, “Embosr: Em-
bodied spatial reasoning for enhanced situated question
answering in 3d scenes,” in 2024 IEEE/RSJ Interna-
tional Conference on Intelligent Robots and Systems
(IROS).
IEEE, 2024, pp. 9811–9816.
[42] Y. Qian, X. Zhu, O. Biza, S. Jiang, L. Zhao, H. Huang,
Y. Qi, and R. Platt, “Thinkgrasp: A vision-language
system for strategic part grasping in clutter,” arXiv
preprint arXiv:2407.11298, 2024.
[43] R. Jiao, A. Fasoli, F. Giuliari, M. Bortolon, S. Povoli,
G. Mei, Y. Wang, and F. Poiesi, “Free-form language-
based robotic reasoning and grasping,” arXiv preprint
arXiv:2503.13082, 2025.
[44] H. Zhen, X. Qiu, P. Chen, J. Yang, X. Yan, Y. Du,
Y. Hong, and C. Gan, “3d-vla: A 3d vision-language-
action generative world model,” in International Con-
ference on Machine Learning.
PMLR, 2024, pp.
61 229–61 245.
[45] P. Intelligence, K. Black, N. Brown, J. Darpinian,
K. Dhabalia, D. Driess, A. Esmail, M. Equi, C. Finn,
N. Fusai et al., “\pi
0.5: a vision-language-action
model with open-world generalization,” arXiv preprint
arXiv:2504.16054, 2025.
[46] Z. Zhou, Y. Zhu, J. Wen, C. Shen, and Y. Xu, “Vision-
language-action model with open-world embodied rea-
soning from pretrained knowledge,” arXiv preprint
arXiv:2505.21906, 2025.
[47] H. Zhen, Q. Sun, H. Zhang, J. Li, S. Zhou, Y. Du,
and C. Gan, “Tesseract: learning 4d embodied world
models,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2504.20995, 2025.
[48] X. Chi, H. Zhang, C.-K. Fan, X. Qi, R. Zhang, A. Chen,
C.-m. Chan, W. Xue, W. Luo, S. Zhang et al., “Eva: An
embodied world model for future video anticipation,”
arXiv preprint arXiv:2410.15461, 2024.
[49] Z. Cheng, S. Leng, H. Zhang, Y. Xin, X. Li, G. Chen,
Y. Zhu, W. Zhang, Z. Luo, D. Zhao, and L. Bing,
“Videollama 2: Advancing spatial-temporal modeling
and audio understanding in video-llms,” arXiv preprint
arXiv:2406.07476, 2024.
[50] R. Liao, M. Erler, H. Wang, G. Zhai, G. Zhang, Y. Ma,
and V. Tresp, “Videoinsta: Zero-shot long video un-
derstanding via informative spatial-temporal reasoning
with llms,” in Findings of the Association for Computa-
tional Linguistics: EMNLP 2024, 2024, pp. 6577–6602.
[51] K. Shimada, A. Politis, P. Sudarsanam, D. A. Krause,
K. Uchida, S. Adavanne, A. Hakala, Y. Koyama,
N. Takahashi, S. Takahashi et al., “Starss23: An audio-
visual dataset of spatial recordings of real scenes with
spatiotemporal annotations of sound events,” Advances
in neural information processing systems, vol. 36, pp.
72 931–72 957, 2023.
[52] Z. Zheng, P. Peng, Z. Ma, X. Chen, E. Choi, and
D. Harwath, “Bat: Learning to reason about spatial
sounds with large language models,” arXiv preprint
arXiv:2402.01591, 2024.
[53] W. Wang, A. Nie, W. Zhou, Y. Kai, and C. Hu,
“Teaching physical awareness to llms through sounds,”
arXiv preprint arXiv:2506.08524, 2025.
[54] M. Chen, Z. Cui, X. Liu, J. Xiang, C. Zheng, J. Li, and
E. Shlizerman, “Savvy: Spatial awareness via audio-
visual llms through seeing and hearing,” arXiv preprint
arXiv:2506.05414, 2025.
[55] J. Bai, S. Bai, Y. Chu, Z. Cui, K. Dang, X. Deng, Y. Fan,
W. Ge, Y. Han, F. Huang et al., “Qwen technical report,”
arXiv preprint arXiv:2309.16609, 2023.
[56] J. Zha, Y. Fan, X. Yang, C. Gao, and X. Chen, “How
to enable llm with 3d capacity? a survey of spatial
reasoning in llm,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2504.05786,
2025.
[57] Q. Ma, R. Yang, B. Ren, N. Sebe, E. Konukoglu,
L. Van Gool, and D. P. Paudel, “Cityloc: 6dof
pose distributional localization for text descriptions in
large-scale scenes with gaussian representation,” arXiv
preprint arXiv:2501.08982, 2025.
[58] X. Zheng, C. Liao, Y. Fu, K. Lei, Y. Lyu, L. Jiang,
B. Ren, J. Chen, J. Wang, C. Li et al., “Mllms
are deeply affected by modality bias,” arXiv preprint
arXiv:2505.18657, 2025.
[59] Z. Wu, T. Liu, L. Luo, Z. Zhong, J. Chen, H. Xiao,
C. Hou, H. Lou, Y. Chen, R. Yang et al., “Mars:
An instance-aware, modular and realistic simulator for
autonomous driving,” in CAAI International Conference
on Artificial Intelligence.
Springer, 2023, pp. 3–15.
[60] Y. Fu, R. Wang, Y. Fu, D. P. Paudel, X. Huang, and
L. Van Gool, “Objectrelator: Enabling cross-view object
relation understanding in ego-centric and exo-centric
videos,” ICCV, 2025.
[61] Y. Li, Q. Ma, R. Yang, H. Li, M. Ma, B. Ren,
N. Popovic, N. Sebe, E. Konukoglu, T. Gevers et al.,
“Scenesplat: Gaussian splatting-based scene under-
standing with vision-language pretraining,” in ICCV,
2025.
[62] T. Br¨odermann, C. Sakaridis, Y. Fu, and L. Van Gool,
“Cafuser: Condition-aware multimodal fusion for robust
semantic perception of driving scenes,” IEEE Robotics
and Automation Letters, 2025.
[63] M. Ma, Q. Ma, Y. Li, J. Cheng, R. Yang, B. Ren,
N. Popovic, M. Wei, N. Sebe, L. Van Gool et al.,
“Scenesplat++: A large dataset and comprehensive
benchmark for language gaussian splatting,” arXiv


27
preprint arXiv:2506.08710, 2025.
[64] Y. Lyu, X. Zheng, J. Zhou, and L. Wang, “Unibind:
Llm-augmented unified and balanced representation
space to bind them
all,” in Proceedings
of
the
IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern
Recognition, 2024, pp. 26 752–26 762.
[65] X. Zheng, Z. Weng, Y. Lyu, L. Jiang, H. Xue, B. Ren,
D. Paudel, N. Sebe, L. Van Gool, and X. Hu, “Re-
trieval augmented generation and understanding in
vision: A survey and new outlook,” arXiv preprint
arXiv:2503.18016, 2025.
[66] J. Zhou, X. Zheng, Y. Lyu, and L. Wang, “Eventbind:
Learning a unified representation to bind them all for
event-based open-world understanding,” in European
Conference on Computer Vision.
Springer, 2024, pp.
477–494.
[67] X. Zheng, Y. Lyu, and L. Wang, “Learning modality-
agnostic representation for semantic segmentation from
any modalities,” in European Conference on Computer
Vision.
Springer, 2024, pp. 146–165.
[68] Y. Lyu, X. Zheng, D. Kim, and L. Wang, “Omnibind:
Teach to build unequal-scale modality interaction for
omni-bind of all,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2405.16108,
2024.
[69] Z. Dongfang, X. Zheng, Z. Weng, Y. Lyu, D. P. Paudel,
L. Van Gool, K. Yang, and X. Hu, “Are multimodal
large language models ready for omnidirectional spatial
reasoning?” arXiv preprint arXiv:2505.11907, 2025.
[70] X. Zhang, Z. Ye, and X. Zheng, “Towards omnidirec-
tional reasoning with 360-r1: A dataset, benchmark, and
grpo-based method,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2505.14197,
2025.
[71] G. Zhou, P. Qiu, C. Chen, J. Wang, Z. Yang, J. Xu,
and M. Qiu, “Reinforced mllm: A survey on rl-based
reasoning in multimodal large language models,” arXiv
preprint arXiv:2504.21277, 2025.
[72] C. Wang, T. Zhang, R. Hong, and J. Huang, “A short
survey on small reasoning models: Training, inference,
applications and research directions,” arXiv preprint
arXiv:2504.09100, 2025.
[73] Z. Ke, F. Jiao, Y. Ming, X.-P. Nguyen, A. Xu, D. X.
Long, M. Li, C. Qin, P. Wang, S. Savarese et al., “A
survey of frontiers in llm reasoning: Inference scaling,
learning to reason, and agentic systems,” arXiv preprint
arXiv:2504.09037, 2025.
[74] J. Bi, S. Liang, X. Zhou, P. Liu, J. Guo, Y. Tang,
L. Song, C. Huang, G. Sun, J. He et al., “Why reasoning
matters? a survey of advancements in multimodal rea-
soning (v1),” arXiv preprint arXiv:2504.03151, 2025.
[75] Z. Chen, S. Wang, Z. Tan, X. Fu, Z. Lei, P. Wang,
H. Liu, C. Shen, and J. Li, “A survey of scaling
in large language model reasoning,” arXiv preprint
arXiv:2504.02181, 2025.
[76] Q. Chen, L. Qin, J. Liu, D. Peng, J. Guan, P. Wang,
M. Hu, Y. Zhou, T. Gao, and W. Che, “Towards
reasoning era: A survey of long chain-of-thought
for reasoning large language models,” arXiv preprint
arXiv:2503.09567, 2025.
[77] A. Forootani, “A survey on mathematical reasoning
and optimization with large language models,” arXiv
preprint arXiv:2503.17726, 2025.
[78] R. Wang, H. Wang, B. Xue, J. Pang, S. Liu, Y. Chen,
J. Qiu, D. F. Wong, H. Ji, and K.-F. Wong, “Har-
nessing the reasoning economy: A survey of efficient
reasoning for large language models,” arXiv preprint
arXiv:2503.24377, 2025.
[79] Y. Liu, J. Wu, Y. He, R. Gong, J. Xia, L. Li, H. Gao,
H. Chen, B. Bi, J. Zhang et al., “Efficient inference
for large reasoning models: A survey,” arXiv preprint
arXiv:2503.23077, 2025.
[80] X. Qu, Y. Li, Z. Su, W. Sun, J. Yan, D. Liu,
G. Cui, D. Liu, S. Liang, J. He et al., “A sur-
vey of efficient reasoning for large reasoning models:
Language, multimodality, and beyond,” arXiv preprint
arXiv:2503.21614, 2025.
[81] Z. Lin, Y. Gao, X. Zhao, Y. Yang, and J. Sang, “Mind
with eyes: from language reasoning to multimodal rea-
soning,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2503.18071, 2025.
[82] Y. Sui, Y.-N. Chuang, G. Wang, J. Zhang, T. Zhang,
J. Yuan, H. Liu, A. Wen, S. Zhong, H. Chen et al., “Stop
overthinking: A survey on efficient reasoning for large
language models,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2503.16419,
2025.
[83] Y.
Wang,
S.
Wu,
Y.
Zhang,
S.
Yan,
Z.
Liu,
J. Luo, and H. Fei, “Multimodal chain-of-thought
reasoning: A comprehensive survey,” arXiv preprint
arXiv:2503.12605, 2025.
[84] D. Bandyopadhyay, S. Bhattacharjee, and A. Ekbal,
“Thinking machines: A survey of llm based reasoning
strategies,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2503.10814, 2025.
[85] X. Li, Z. Cai, S. Wang, K. Yu, and F. Chen, “A survey
on enhancing causal reasoning ability of large language
models,” in Pacific-Asia Conference on Knowledge Dis-
covery and Data Mining. Springer, 2025, pp. 399–416.
[86] Y. Yan, J. Su, J. He, F. Fu, X. Zheng, Y. Lyu,
K. Wang, S. Wang, Q. Wen, and X. Hu, “A survey of
mathematical reasoning in the era of multimodal large
language model: Benchmark, method & challenges,”
arXiv preprint arXiv:2412.11936, 2024.
[87] D. Yang, T. Liu, D. Zhang, A. Simoulin, X. Liu, Y. Cao,
Z. Teng, X. Qian, G. Yang, J. Luo et al., “Code to think,
think to code: A survey on code-enhanced reasoning
and reasoning-driven code intelligence in llms,” arXiv
preprint arXiv:2502.19411, 2025.
[88] Z.-Z. Li, D. Zhang, M.-L. Zhang, J. Zhang, Z. Liu,
Y. Yao, H. Xu, J. Zheng, P.-J. Wang, X. Chen
et al., “From system 1 to system 2: A survey
of reasoning large language models,” arXiv preprint
arXiv:2502.17419, 2025.
[89] F. Cheng, H. Li, F. Liu, R. van Rooij, K. Zhang,
and Z. Lin, “Empowering llms with logical rea-
soning:
A
comprehensive
survey,”
arXiv
preprint
arXiv:2502.15652, 2025.
[90] G. Srivastava, S. Cao, and X. Wang, “Towards reason-
ing ability of small language models,” arXiv preprint
arXiv:2502.11569, 2025.


28
[91] F. Xu, Q. Hao, Z. Zong, J. Wang, Y. Zhang, J. Wang,
X. Lan, J. Gong, T. Ouyang, F. Meng et al., “To-
wards large reasoning models: A survey of reinforced
reasoning with large language models,” arXiv preprint
arXiv:2501.09686, 2025.
[92] Y. Wang, W. Chen, X. Han, X. Lin, H. Zhao, Y. Liu,
B. Zhai, J. Yuan, Q. You, and H. Yang, “Exploring
the reasoning abilities of multimodal large language
models (mllms): A comprehensive survey on emerg-
ing trends in multimodal reasoning,” arXiv preprint
arXiv:2401.06805, 2024.
[93] J. Wang, Y. Ming, Z. Shi, V. Vineet, X. Wang, Y. Li,
and N. Joshi, “Is a picture worth a thousand words?
delving into spatial reasoning for vision language mod-
els,” in The Thirty-Eighth Annual Conference on Neural
Information Processing Systems, 2024.
[94] Y. Shu, B. Ren, Z. Xiong, D. P. Paudel, L. Van Gool,
B. Demir, N. Sebe, and P. Rota, “Earthmind: To-
wards multi-granular and multi-sensor earth observa-
tion with large multimodal models,” arXiv preprint
arXiv:2506.01667, 2025.
[95] C. Li, C. Zhang, H. Zhou, N. Collier, A. Korhonen,
and I. Vulic, “Topviewrs: Vision-language models as
top-view spatial reasoners,” in Proceedings of the Con-
ference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language
Processing, 2024.
[96] M. Jia, Z. Qi, S. Zhang, W. Zhang, X. Yu, J. He,
H. Wang, and L. Yi, “Omnispatial: Towards comprehen-
sive spatial reasoning benchmark for vision language
models,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2506.03135, 2025.
[97] R. Wu and D. Guo, “Do large language models have
spatial cognitive abilities?” ACM Transactions on Intel-
ligent Systems and Technology, 2025.
[98] Y. Liao, X. Liu, C. Wang, Z. Liu, Y. Zhang, and
Y. Zhu, “Reasoning paths with reference objects elicit
quantitative spatial reasoning in large vision-language
models,” in Proceedings of the Conference on Empirical
Methods in Natural Language Processing, 2024.
[99] Y.
Zhang,
J.
Han,
L.
Wang,
L.
Guibas,
and
S. Xie, “Spatial understanding from videos: Struc-
tured prompts meet simulation data,” arXiv preprint
arXiv:2506.03642, 2025.
[100] Z. Zhou et al., “Image-of-thought prompting for vi-
sual reasoning refinement in multimodal large language
models,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2405.13872, 2024.
[101] F. Zhu, H. Wang, Y. Xie, J. Gu, T. Ding, J. Yang, and
H. Jiang, “Struct2d: A perception-guided framework for
spatial reasoning in large multimodal models,” arXiv
preprint arXiv:2506.04220, 2025.
[102] P. Y. Lee, J. Je, C. Park, M. A. Uy, L. Guibas,
and M. Sung, “Perspective-aware reasoning in vision-
language models via mental imagery simulation,” in
Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF International Conference
on Computer Vision, 2025.
[103] Y. Meng et al., “I know about “up”! enhancing spatial
reasoning in visual language models through 3d recon-
struction,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2407.14133, 2024.
[104] R. Liu, R. Wu, B. Van Hoorick, P. Tokmakov, S. Za-
kharov, and C. Vondrick, “Zero-1-to-3: Zero-shot one
image to 3d object,” in Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF
international conference on computer vision, 2023, pp.
9298–9309.
[105] L. Marsili, L. Sforza, L. Barsellotti, N. Amoroso, and
A. Monaco, “Visual agentic ai for spatial reasoning with
a dynamic api,” in Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Con-
ference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition,
2025.
[106] S. Ravi, M. Chen, A. Sen, S. Shivakumar, E. Sklar, and
E. Santos, “Out of sight, not out of context? egocentric
spatial reasoning in vlms across disjoint frames,” arXiv
preprint arXiv:2505.24257, 2024.
[107] J. Feng, Y. Du, T. Liu, S. Guo, Y. Lin, and Y. Li,
“Citygpt: Empowering urban spatial cognition of large
language models,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2406.13948,
2024.
[108] H. Li, J. Chen, Z. Wei, S. Huang, T. Hui, J. Gao, X. Wei,
and S. Liu, “Llava-st: A multimodal large language
model for fine-grained spatial-temporal understanding,”
arXiv preprint arXiv:2501.08282, 2025.
[109] P. Wu, Y. Liu, M. Liu, and J. Shen, “St-think:
How multimodal large language models reason about
4d worlds from ego-centric videos,” arXiv preprint
arXiv:2503.12542, 2025.
[110] A. Ray, J. Duan, R. Tan, D. Bashkirova, R. Hendrix,
K. Ehsani, A. Kembhavi, B. A. Plummer, R. Kr-
ishna, K.-H. Zeng et al., “Sat: Spatial aptitude train-
ing for multimodal language models,” arXiv preprint
arXiv:2412.07755, vol. 3, 2024.
[111] O. Ogezi et al., “Spare: Enhancing spatial reasoning
in vision-language models with synthetic data,” arXiv
preprint arXiv:2504.20648, 2025.
[112] K. Tang et al., “Sparkle: Mastering basic spatial capa-
bilities in vision language models elicits generalization
to spatial reasoning,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2410.16162,
2025.
[113] J. Ko et al., “St-vlm: Kinematic instruction tuning for
spatio-temporal reasoning in vision-language models,”
arXiv preprint arXiv:2503.19355, 2025.
[114] C. Li, W. Wu, H. Zhang, Y. Xia, S. Mao, L. Dong,
I. Vuli´c, and F. Wei, “Imagine while reasoning in space:
Multimodal visualization-of-thought,” arXiv preprint
arXiv:2501.07542, 2025.
[115] X. Liang, X. Guo, Z. Jin, W. Pan, P. Shang, D. Cai,
B. Lin, and J. Ye, “Enhancing spatial reasoning
through visual and textual thinking,” arXiv preprint
arXiv:2507.20529, 2025.
[116] Z. Pan et al., “Metaspatial: Reinforcing 3d spatial
reasoning in vlms for the metaverse,” arXiv preprint
arXiv:2503.18470, 2025.
[117] Z. Liao, Q. Xie, Y. Zhang, Z. Kong, H. Lu, Z. Yang,
and Z. Deng, “Improved visual-spatial reasoning via
r1-zero-like training,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2504.00883,
2025.
[118] Y. Wang et al., “M2-reasoning: Empowering mllms with
unified general and spatial reasoning,” arXiv preprint
arXiv:2507.08306, 2025.


29
[119] A. Radford, J. W. Kim, C. Hallacy, A. Ramesh, G. Goh,
S. Agarwal, G. Sastry, A. Askell, P. Mishkin, J. Clark
et al., “Learning transferable visual models from natural
language supervision,” in International conference on
machine learning.
PmLR, 2021, pp. 8748–8763.
[120] M. Cherti, R. Beaumont, R. Wightman, M. Wortsman,
G. Ilharco, C. Gordon, C. Schuhmann, L. Schmidt,
and J. Jitsev, “Reproducible scaling laws for con-
trastive language-image learning,” in Proceedings of the
IEEE/CVF conference on computer vision and pattern
recognition, 2023, pp. 2818–2829.
[121] Q. Sun, Y. Fang, L. Wu, X. Wang, and Y. Cao, “Eva-
clip: Improved training techniques for clip at scale,”
arXiv preprint arXiv:2303.15389, 2023.
[122] M. Tschannen, A. Gritsenko, X. Wang, M. F. Naeem,
I. Alabdulmohsin, N. Parthasarathy, T. Evans, L. Beyer,
Y. Xia, B. Mustafa et al., “Siglip 2: Multilingual vision-
language encoders with improved semantic understand-
ing, localization, and dense features,” arXiv preprint
arXiv:2502.14786, 2025.
[123] X. Zhai, B. Mustafa, A. Kolesnikov, and L. Beyer,
“Sigmoid loss for language image pre-training,” in
Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF international conference
on computer vision, 2023, pp. 11 975–11 986.
[124] W. Ma, L. Ye, C. de Melo, A. L. Yuille, and J. Chen,
“Spatialllm: A compound 3d-informed design towards
spatially-intelligent large multimodal models,” in Pro-
ceedings of the IEEE/CVF conference on computer
vision and pattern recognition, 2025.
[125] Z. Zhang, X. Li, Z. Xu, W. Peng, Z. Zhou, M. Shi, and
S. Huang, “Mpdrive: Improving spatial understanding
with marker-based prompt learning for autonomous
driving,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2504.00379, 2025.
[126] K. Ranasinghe, S. N. Shukla, O. Poursaeed, M. S. Ryoo,
and T.-Y. Lin, “Learning to localize objects improves
spatial reasoning in visual-llms,” in Proceedings of the
IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern
Recognition, 2024, pp. 12 977–12 987.
[127] W. Cai, I. Ponomarenko, J. Yuan, X. Li, W. Yang,
H. Dong, and B. Zhao, “Spatialbot: Precise spatial
understanding with vision language models,” arXiv
preprint arXiv:2406.13642, 2024.
[128] Y. Liu, M. Ma, X. Yu, P. Ding, H. Zhao, M. Sun,
S. Huang, and D. Wang, “Ssr: Enhancing depth per-
ception in vision-language models via rationale-guided
spatial reasoning,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2505.12448,
2025.
[129] H. Zheng, B. Tian, M. Wu, Z. Tang, K. Nahrstedt,
and A. G. Schwing, “Spatio-temporal llm: Reason-
ing about environments and actions,” arXiv preprint
arXiv:2507.05258, 2025.
[130] E. Daxberger, N. Wenzel, D. Griffiths, H. Gang,
J. Lazarow, G. Kohavi, K. Kang, M. Eichner, Y. Yang,
A. Dehghan, and P. Grasch, “Mm-spatial: Exploring
3d spatial understanding in multimodal llms,” arXiv
preprint arXiv:2503.13111, 2025.
[131] S. Tong, E. Brown, P. Wu, S. Woo, M. Middepogu,
S. C. Akula, J. Yang, S. Yang, A. Iyer, X. Pan, Z. Wang,
R. Fergus, Y. LeCun, and S. Xie, “Cambrian-1: A fully
open, vision-centric exploration of multimodal llms,”
in Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems
(NeurIPS), 2024.
[132] R. Rajabi et al., “Towards grounded visual spatial
reasoning in multi-modal vision language models,” in
ICLR Workshop, 2024.
[133] W. Zhang, Y. Huang, Y. Xu, J. Huang, H. Zhi, S. Ren,
W. Xu, and J. Zhang, “Why do mllms struggle with spa-
tial understanding? a systematic analysis from data to
architecture,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2509.02359, 2025.
[134] T.-Y. Wu, S.-Y. Huang, and Y.-C. F. Wang, “Data-
efficient 3d visual grounding via order-aware referring,”
in 2025 IEEE/CVF Winter Conference on Applications
of Computer Vision (WACV).
IEEE, 2025, pp. 3107–
3117.
[135] Z. Guo, Y. Tang, R. Zhang, D. Wang, Z. Wang,
B. Zhao, and X. Li, “Viewrefer: Grasp the multi-view
knowledge for 3d visual grounding,” in Proceedings of
the IEEE/CVF International Conference on Computer
Vision, 2023, pp. 15 372–15 383.
[136] Z. Yuan, J. Ren, C.-M. Feng, H. Zhao, S. Cui, and Z. Li,
“Visual programming for zero-shot open-vocabulary 3d
visual grounding,” in Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF
Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recogni-
tion, 2024, pp. 20 623–20 633.
[137] B. M. ¨Ocal, M. Tatarchenko, S. Karao˘glu, and T. Gev-
ers, “Sceneteller: Language-to-3d scene generation,” in
European Conference on Computer Vision.
Springer,
2024, pp. 362–378.
[138] Q. Wu, D. Iliash, D. Ritchie, M. Savva, and A. X.
Chang, “Diorama: Unleashing zero-shot single-view
3d scene modeling,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2411.19492,
2024.
[139] J. Wen, Y. Zhu, J. Li, Z. Tang, C. Shen, and F. Feng,
“Dexvla: Vision-language model with plug-in diffu-
sion expert for general robot control,” arXiv preprint
arXiv:2502.05855, 2025.
[140] R. Zheng, Y. Liang, S. Huang, J. Gao, H. Daum´e III,
A. Kolobov, F. Huang, and J. Yang, “Tracevla: Vi-
sual trace prompting enhances spatial-temporal aware-
ness for generalist robotic policies,” arXiv preprint
arXiv:2412.10345, 2024.
[141] L. Zhao, D. Cai, L. Sheng, and D. Xu, “3dvg-
transformer: Relation modeling for visual grounding
on point clouds,” in Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF
International Conference on Computer Vision, 2021, pp.
2928–2937.
[142] J. Huang, B. Jia, Y. Wang, Z. Zhu, X. Linghu,
Q. Li, S.-C. Zhu, and S. Huang, “Unveiling the mist
over 3d vision-language understanding: Object-centric
evaluation
with
chain-of-analysis,”
arXiv
preprint
arXiv:2503.22420, 2025.
[143] C. Zhu, T. Wang, W. Zhang, K. Chen, and X. Liu,
“Scanreason: Empowering 3d visual grounding with
reasoning capabilities,” in European Conference on
Computer Vision.
Springer, 2024, pp. 151–168.
[144] Y.-H. Yang, L. Piccinelli, M. Segu, S. Li, R. Huang,


30
Y. Fu, M. Pollefeys, H. Blum, and Z. Bauer, “3d-
mood: Lifting 2d to 3d for monocular open-set object
detection,” ICCV, 2025.
[145] A. Kirillov, E. Mintun, N. Ravi, H. Mao, C. Rolland,
L. Gustafson, T. Xiao, S. Whitehead, A. C. Berg, W.-
Y. Lo et al., “Segment anything,” in Proceedings of the
IEEE/CVF international conference on computer vision,
2023, pp. 4015–4026.
[146] Z. Qi, Y. Fang, Z. Sun, X. Wu, T. Wu, J. Wang,
D. Lin, and H. Zhao, “Gpt4point: A unified framework
for point-language understanding and generation,” in
Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer
Vision and Pattern Recognition, 2024, pp. 26 417–
26 427.
[147] J. Huang, S. Yong, X. Ma, X. Linghu, P. Li, Y. Wang,
Q. Li, S.-C. Zhu, B. Jia, and S. Huang, “An em-
bodied generalist agent in 3d world,” arXiv preprint
arXiv:2311.12871, 2023.
[148] R. Fu, J. Liu, X. Chen, Y. Nie, and W. Xiong,
“Scene-llm: Extending language model for 3d vi-
sual understanding and reasoning,” arXiv preprint
arXiv:2403.11401, 2024.
[149] N. Zantout, H. Zhang, P. Kachana, J. Qiu, J. Zhang,
and W. Wang, “Sort3d: Spatial object-centric reasoning
toolbox for zero-shot 3d grounding using large language
models,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2504.18684, 2025.
[150] Z. Wang, H. Huang, Y. Zhao, Z. Zhang, and Z. Zhao,
“Chat-3d: Data-efficiently tuning large language model
for universal dialogue of 3d scenes,” arXiv preprint
arXiv:2308.08769, 2023.
[151] H. Huang, Y. Chen, Z. Wang, R. Huang, R. Xu,
T. Wang, L. Liu, X. Cheng, Y. Zhao, J. Pang
et al., “Chat-scene: Bridging 3d scene and large lan-
guage models with object identifiers,” arXiv preprint
arXiv:2312.08168, 2023.
[152] Y. Hong, H. Zhen, P. Chen, S. Zheng, Y. Du, Z. Chen,
and C. Gan, “3d-llm: Injecting the 3d world into large
language models,” Advances in Neural Information Pro-
cessing Systems, vol. 36, pp. 20 482–20 494, 2023.
[153] J. Deng, T. He, L. Jiang, T. Wang, F. Dayoub,
and I. Reid, “3d-llava: Towards generalist 3d lmms
with omni superpoint transformer,” arXiv preprint
arXiv:2501.01163, 2025.
[154] B. Kerbl, G. Kopanas, T. Leimk¨uhler, and G. Drettakis,
“3d gaussian splatting for real-time radiance field ren-
dering.” 2023.
[155] Q. Ma, Y. Li, B. Ren, N. Sebe, E. Konukoglu, T. Gevers,
L. Van Gool, and D. P. Paudel, “A large-scale dataset
of gaussian splats and their self-supervised pretraining,”
in 3DV.
IEEE, 2025, pp. 145–155.
[156] J. Li, D. Li, S. Savarese, and S. Hoi, “Blip-2: Bootstrap-
ping language-image pre-training with frozen image
encoders and large language models,” in International
conference on machine learning.
PMLR, 2023, pp.
19 730–19 742.
[157] H. Xiong, Y. Zhuge, J. Zhu, L. Zhang, and H. Lu,
“3ur-llm: An end-to-end multimodal large language
model for 3d scene understanding,” arXiv preprint
arXiv:2501.07819, 2025.
[158] Z. Li, C. Zhang, X. Wang, R. Ren, Y. Xu, R. Ma,
X. Liu, and R. Wei, “3dmit: 3d multi-modal instruction
tuning for scene understanding,” in 2024 IEEE Interna-
tional Conference on Multimedia and Expo Workshops
(ICMEW).
IEEE, 2024, pp. 1–5.
[159] H. Yu, W. Li, S. Wang, J. Chen, and J. Zhu,
“Inst3d-lmm: Instance-aware 3d scene understanding
with multi-modal instruction tuning,” arXiv preprint
arXiv:2503.00513, 2025.
[160] A.
Thai,
S.
Peng,
K.
Genova,
L.
Guibas,
and
T. Funkhouser, “Splattalk: 3d vqa with gaussian splat-
ting,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2503.06271, 2025.
[161] Z. Qi, Z. Zhang, Y. Fang, J. Wang, and H. Zhao,
“Gpt4scene:
Understand
3d
scenes
from
videos
with
vision-language
models,”
arXiv
preprint
arXiv:2501.01428, 2025.
[162] L. Ling, C.-H. Lin, T.-Y. Lin, Y. Ding, Y. Zeng,
Y. Sheng, Y. Ge, M.-Y. Liu, A. Bera, and Z. Li,
“Scenethesis: A language and vision agentic frame-
work
for
3d
scene
generation,”
arXiv
preprint
arXiv:2505.02836, 2025.
[163] Y. Yang, F.-Y. Sun, L. Weihs, E. VanderBilt, A. Herrasti,
W. Han, J. Wu, N. Haber, R. Krishna, L. Liu et al.,
“Holodeck: Language guided generation of 3d embod-
ied ai environments,” in Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF
Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recogni-
tion, 2024, pp. 16 227–16 237.
[164] A. C¸ elen, G. Han, K. Schindler, L. Van Gool, I. Armeni,
A. Obukhov, and X. Wang, “I-design: Personalized llm
interior designer,” in European Conference on Com-
puter Vision.
Springer, 2025, pp. 217–234.
[165] Q. He, K. Lin, S. Chen, A. Hu, and Q. Jin, “Think-
program-rectify: 3d situated reasoning with large lan-
guage models,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2404.14705, 2024.
[166] L. Jiang, R. Ji, and L. Zhang, “Sdf-3dgan: A 3d object
generative method based on implicit signed distance
function,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2303.06821, 2023.
[167] L. Jiang, J. Lin, K. Chen, W. Ge, X. Yang, Y. Jiang,
Y. Lyu, X. Zheng, Y. Li, and Y. Chen, “Dimer: Dis-
entangled mesh reconstruction model,” arXiv preprint
arXiv:2504.17670, 2025.
[168] L. Jiang, H. Li, and L. Wang, “A general framework to
boost 3d gs initialization for text-to-3d generation by
lexical richness,” in Proceedings of the 32nd ACM In-
ternational Conference on Multimedia, 2024, pp. 6803–
6812.
[169] L. Jiang, X. Zheng, Y. Lyu, J. Zhou, and L. Wang,
“Brightdreamer: Generic 3d gaussian generative frame-
work for fast text-to-3d synthesis,” arXiv preprint
arXiv:2403.11273, 2024.
[170] T.
Hua,
L.
Jiang,
Y.-C.
Chen,
and
W.
Zhao,
“Sat2city: 3d city generation from a single satellite
image with cascaded latent diffusion,” arXiv preprint
arXiv:2507.04403, 2025.
[171] Y. Sasazawa and Y. Sogawa, “Layout generation
agents with large language models,” arXiv preprint
arXiv:2405.08037, 2024.


31
[172] Y. Yang, J. Lu, Z. Zhao, Z. Luo, J. J. Yu, V. Sanchez,
and F. Zheng, “Llplace: The 3d indoor scene layout
generation and editing via large language model,” arXiv
preprint arXiv:2406.03866, 2024.
[173] C. Wang, H. Zhong, M. Chai, M. He, D. Chen,
and
J.
Liao,
“Chat2layout:
Interactive
3d
furni-
ture layout with a multimodal llm,” arXiv preprint
arXiv:2407.21333, 2024.
[174] Cursor, “Cursor: The ai-powered code editor,” 2023,
accessed:
2025-06-19.
[Online].
Available:
https://
www.cursor.so/
[175] GitHub, “Github copilot,” 2021, accessed: 2025-06-19.
[Online]. Available: https://copilot.github.com/
[176] V.
Kumaran,
J.
Rowe,
B.
Mott,
and
J.
Lester,
“Scenecraft: automating interactive narrative scene gen-
eration in digital games with large language models,” in
Proceedings of the AAAI Conference on Artificial Intel-
ligence and Interactive Digital Entertainment, vol. 19,
no. 1, 2023, pp. 86–96.
[177] H. I. I. Tam, H. I. D. Pun, A. T. Wang, A. X.
Chang, and M. Savva, “Scenemotifcoder: Example-
driven visual program learning for generating 3d object
arrangements,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2408.02211, 2024.
[178] S. Wang, C. Chen, X. Le, Q. Xu, L. Xu, Y. Zhang,
and J. Yang, “Cad-gpt: Synthesising cad construction
sequence with spatial reasoning-enhanced multimodal
llms,” in Proceedings of the AAAI Conference on Arti-
ficial Intelligence, vol. 39, no. 8, 2025, pp. 7880–7888.
[179] X. Wang, J. Zheng, Y. Hu, H. Zhu, Q. Yu, and Z. Zhou,
“From 2d cad drawings to 3d parametric models: A
vision-language approach,” in Proceedings of the AAAI
Conference on Artificial Intelligence, vol. 39, no. 8,
2025, pp. 7961–7969.
[180] J. Li, W. Ma, X. Li, Y. Lou, G. Zhou, and X. Zhou,
“Cad-llama: leveraging large language models for
computer-aided design parametric 3d model genera-
tion,” in Proceedings of the Computer Vision and Pat-
tern Recognition Conference, 2025, pp. 18 563–18 573.
[181] R. K. Jones, P. Guerrero, N. J. Mitra, and D. Ritchie,
“Shapelib: designing a library of procedural 3d shape
abstractions with large language models,” arXiv preprint
arXiv:2502.08884, 2025.
[182] Z. Zhou, Y. Zhu, M. Zhu, J. Wen, N. Liu, Z. Xu,
W. Meng, R. Cheng, Y. Peng, C. Shen et al., “Chatvla:
Unified multimodal understanding and robot control
with vision-language-action model,” arXiv preprint
arXiv:2502.14420, 2025.
[183] S.
K.
Ramakrishnan,
A.
Gokaslan,
E.
Wijmans,
O.
Maksymets,
A.
Clegg,
J.
Turner,
E.
Under-
sander, W. Galuba, A. Westbury, A. X. Chang et al.,
“Habitat-matterport 3d dataset (hm3d): 1000 large-
scale 3d environments for embodied ai,” arXiv preprint
arXiv:2109.08238, 2021.
[184] H. R. Walke, K. Black, T. Z. Zhao, Q. Vuong, C. Zheng,
P. Hansen-Estruch, A. W. He, V. Myers, M. J. Kim,
M. Du et al., “Bridgedata v2: A dataset for robot
learning at scale,” in Conference on Robot Learning.
PMLR, 2023, pp. 1723–1736.
[185] X. Zheng, C. Liao, Z. Weng, K. Lei, Z. Dongfang,
H. He, Y. Lyu, L. Jiang, L. Qi, L. Chen et al.,
“Panorama: The rise of omnidirectional vision in the
embodied ai era,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2509.12989,
2025.
[186] H. Gardner and T. Hatch, “Educational implications
of the theory of multiple intelligences,” Educational
researcher, vol. 18, no. 8, pp. 4–10, 1989.
[187] A. Kamath, J. Hessel, and K.-W. Chang, “What’s”
up” with vision-language models? investigating their
struggle
with
spatial
reasoning,”
arXiv
preprint
arXiv:2310.19785, 2023.
[188] K. Li, Q. Xu, T. Qian, Y. Fu, Y. Jiao, and X. Wang,
“Clivis: Unleashing cognitive map through linguistic-
visual synergy for embodied visual reasoning,” arXiv
preprint arXiv:2506.17629, 2025.
[189] M. J. Kim, K. Pertsch, S. Karamcheti, T. Xiao, A. Bal-
akrishna, S. Nair, R. Rafailov, E. P. Foster, P. R. Sanketi,
Q. Vuong et al., “Openvla: An open-source vision-
language-action model,” in 8th Annual Conference on
Robot Learning, 2024.
[190] K. Black, N. Brown, D. Driess, A. Esmail, M. Equi,
C.
Finn,
N.
Fusai,
L.
Groom,
K.
Hausman,
B.
Ichter
et
al.,
“π0:
A
vision-language-action
flow model for general robot control,” arXiv preprint
arXiv:2410.24164, 2024.
[191] L. X. Shi, B. Ichter, M. Equi, L. Ke, K. Pertsch,
Q. Vuong, J. Tanner, A. Walling, H. Wang, N. Fusai
et al., “Hi robot: Open-ended instruction following
with hierarchical vision-language-action models,” arXiv
preprint arXiv:2502.19417, 2025.
[192] C. Li, J. Wen, Y. Peng, Y. Peng, F. Feng, and Y. Zhu,
“Pointvla: Injecting the 3d world into vision-language-
action models,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2503.07511, 2025.
[193] D. Qu, H. Song, Q. Chen, Y. Yao, X. Ye, Y. Ding,
Z. Wang, J. Gu, B. Zhao, D. Wang et al., “Spatialvla:
Exploring spatial representations for visual-language-
action model,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2501.15830, 2025.
[194] P. Li, Y. Chen, H. Wu, X. Ma, X. Wu, Y. Huang,
L. Wang, T. Kong, and T. Tan, “Bridgevla: Input-
output alignment for efficient 3d manipulation learn-
ing
with
vision-language
models,”
arXiv
preprint
arXiv:2506.07961, 2025.
[195] B. Zitkovich, T. Yu, S. Xu, P. Xu, T. Xiao, F. Xia,
J. Wu, P. Wohlhart, S. Welker, A. Wahid et al., “Rt-2:
Vision-language-action models transfer web knowledge
to robotic control,” in Conference on Robot Learning.
PMLR, 2023, pp. 2165–2183.
[196] J. Yang, R. Tan, Q. Wu, R. Zheng, B. Peng, Y. Liang,
Y. Gu, M. Cai, S. Ye, J. Jang et al., “Magma: A
foundation model for multimodal ai agents,” in Proceed-
ings of the Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition
Conference, 2025, pp. 14 203–14 214.
[197] M. Zawalski, W. Chen, K. Pertsch, O. Mees, C. Finn,
and S. Levine, “Robotic control via embodied chain-of-
thought reasoning,” in 8th Annual Conference on Robot
Learning, 2024.
[198] J. Li, Y. Zhu, Z. Tang, J. Wen, M. Zhu, X. Liu, C. Li,


32
R. Cheng, Y. Peng, and F. Feng, “Improving vision-
language-action models via chain-of-affordance,” arXiv
preprint arXiv:2412.20451, 2024.
[199] S. Nasiriany, S. Kirmani, T. Ding, L. Smith, Y. Zhu,
D. Driess, D. Sadigh, and T. Xiao, “Rt-affordance: Af-
fordances are versatile intermediate representations for
robot manipulation,” in 1st Workshop on X-Embodiment
Robot Learning, 2024.
[200] S. Karamcheti, S. Nair, A. Balakrishna, P. Liang, T. Kol-
lar, and D. Sadigh, “Prismatic VLMs: Investigating
the Design Space of Visually-Conditioned Language
Models.”
[201] L. Beyer, A. Steiner, A. S. Pinto, A. Kolesnikov,
X. Wang, D. Salz, M. Neumann, I. Alabdulmohsin,
M. Tschannen, E. Bugliarello et al., “Paligemma:
A
versatile
3b
vlm
for
transfer,”
arXiv
preprint
arXiv:2407.07726, 2024.
[202] M. Abdin, J. Aneja, H. Behl, S. Bubeck, R. Eldan,
S. Gunasekar, M. Harrison, R. J. Hewett, M. Javaheripi,
P. Kauffmann et al., “Phi-4 technical report,” arXiv
preprint arXiv:2412.08905, 2024.
[203] P. Wang, S. Bai, S. Tan, S. Wang, Z. Fan, J. Bai,
K. Chen, X. Liu, J. Wang, W. Ge et al., “Qwen2-
vl:
Enhancing
vision-language
model’s
perception
of
the
world
at
any
resolution,”
arXiv
preprint
arXiv:2409.12191, 2024.
[204] S. K. Ramakrishnan, E. Wijmans, P. Kraehenbuehl, and
V. Koltun, “Does spatial cognition emerge in frontier
models?” arXiv preprint arXiv:2410.06468, 2024.
[205] Y. Zhang, Z. Ma, J. Li, Y. Qiao, Z. Wang, J. Chai,
Q. Wu, M. Bansal, and P. Kordjamshidi, “Vision-
and-language navigation today and tomorrow: A sur-
vey in the era of foundation models,” arXiv preprint
arXiv:2407.07035, 2024.
[206] Q. Gu, A. Kuwajerwala, S. Morin, K. M. Jatavallabhula,
B. Sen, A. Agarwal, C. Rivera, W. Paul, K. Ellis,
R. Chellappa et al., “Conceptgraphs: Open-vocabulary
3d scene graphs for perception and planning,” in 2024
IEEE International Conference on Robotics and Au-
tomation (ICRA).
IEEE, 2024, pp. 5021–5028.
[207] D. Zheng, S. Huang, L. Zhao, Y. Zhong, and L. Wang,
“Towards learning a generalist model for embodied nav-
igation,” in Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference
on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, 2024, pp.
13 624–13 634.
[208] Z. Wang and G. H. Lee, “g3d-lf: Generalizable 3d-
language feature fields for embodied tasks,” arXiv
preprint arXiv:2411.17030, 2024.
[209] Y. Yang, H. Yang, J. Zhou, P. Chen, H. Zhang, Y. Du,
and C. Gan, “3d-mem: 3d scene memory for embod-
ied exploration and reasoning,” in Proceedings of the
Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition Conference,
2025, pp. 17 294–17 303.
[210] W. Yuan, J. Duan, V. Blukis, W. Pumacay, R. Krishna,
A. Murali, A. Mousavian, and D. Fox, “Robopoint: A
vision-language model for spatial affordance prediction
for robotics,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2406.10721, 2024.
[211] Y. Liu, D. Chi, S. Wu, Z. Zhang, Y. Hu, L. Zhang,
Y. Zhang, S. Wu, T. Cao, G. Huang et al., “Spatialcot:
Advancing spatial reasoning through coordinate align-
ment and chain-of-thought for embodied task planning,”
arXiv preprint arXiv:2501.10074, 2025.
[212] S. Zhang, Y. Qiao, Q. Wang, L. Guo, Z. Wei,
and J. Liu, “Flexvln: Flexible adaptation for diverse
vision-and-language navigation tasks,” arXiv preprint
arXiv:2503.13966, 2025.
[213] L. Zhang, X. Hao, Y. Tang, H. Fu, X. Zheng, P. Wang,
Z. Wang, W. Ding, and S. Zhang, “Navaˆ3: Under-
standing any instruction, navigating anywhere, finding
anything,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2508.04598, 2025.
[214] L. Zhong, C. Gao, Z. Ding, Y. Liao, H. Ma, S. Zhang,
X. Zhou, and S. Liu, “Topv-nav: Unlocking the top-
view spatial reasoning potential of mllm for zero-shot
object navigation,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2411.16425,
2024.
[215] L. Ling and B. Qianqian, “Endowing embodied agents
with spatial reasoning capabilities for vision-and-
language navigation,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2504.08806,
2025.
[216] S. Tan, M. Ge, D. Guo, H. Liu, and F. Sun, “Knowledge-
based embodied question answering,” IEEE Transac-
tions on Pattern Analysis and Machine Intelligence,
vol. 45, no. 10, pp. 11 948–11 960, 2023.
[217] B. Zhao, Z. Wang, J. Fang, C. Gao, F. Man, J. Cui,
X. Wang, X. Chen, Y. Li, and W. Zhu, “Embodied-r:
Collaborative framework for activating embodied spa-
tial reasoning in foundation models via reinforcement
learning,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2504.12680, 2025.
[218] A. Das, S. Datta, G. Gkioxari, S. Lee, D. Parikh, and
D. Batra, “Embodied question answering,” in Proceed-
ings of the IEEE conference on computer vision and
pattern recognition, 2018, pp. 1–10.
[219] Y. Tang, S. Zhang, X. Hao, P. Wang, J. Wu, Z. Wang,
and S. Zhang, “Affordgrasp: In-context affordance rea-
soning for open-vocabulary task-oriented grasping in
clutter,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2503.00778, 2025.
[220] X. Guo, H. Hu, C. Song, J. Chen, Z. Zhao, Y. Fu,
B. Guan, and Z. Liu, “Unidiffgrasp: A unified frame-
work integrating vlm reasoning and vlm-guided part
diffusion for open-vocabulary constrained grasping with
dual arms,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2505.06832, 2025.
[221] H. Zhi, P. Chen, S. Zhou, Y. Dong, Q. Wu, L. Han,
and M. Tan, “3dflowaction: Learning cross-embodiment
manipulation from 3d flow world model,” arXiv preprint
arXiv:2506.06199, 2025.
[222] A. Hurst, A. Lerer, A. P. Goucher, A. Perelman,
A. Ramesh, A. Clark, A. Ostrow, A. Welihinda,
A. Hayes, A. Radford et al., “Gpt-4o system card,”
arXiv preprint arXiv:2410.21276, 2024.
[223] B. Liu, Y. Dong, Y. Wang, Y. Rao, Y. Tang, W.-
C. Ma, and R. Krishna, “Coarse correspondence elicit
3d spacetime understanding in multimodal language
model,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2408.00754, 2024.
[224] A. Team, H. Zhu, Y. Wang, J. Zhou, W. Chang,
Y. Zhou, Z. Li, J. Chen, C. Shen, J. Pang, and T. He,
“Aether: Geometric-aware unified world modeling,”


33
arXiv preprint arXiv:2503.18945, 2025.
[225] Z. Cheng, J. Hu, Z. Liu, C. Si, W. Li, and S. Gong,
“V-star: Benchmarking video-llms on video spatio-
temporal reasoning,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2503.11495,
2025.
[226] C. Tang, W. Yu, G. Sun, X. Chen, T. Tan, W. Li,
J. Zhang, L. Lu, Z. Ma, Y. Wang et al., “Can large lan-
guage models understand spatial audio?” arXiv preprint
arXiv:2406.07914, 2024.
[227] H. Yun, Y. Yu, W. Yang, K. Lee, and G. Kim, “Pano-
avqa: Grounded audio-visual question answering on
360deg videos,” in Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF In-
ternational Conference on Computer Vision, 2021, pp.
2031–2041.
[228] C. Wen, T. Guo, S. Zhao, W. Zou, and X. Li, “Sari:
Structured audio reasoning via curriculum-guided rein-
forcement learning,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2504.15900,
2025.
[229] S. Chowdhury, S. Nag, S. Dasgupta, J. Chen, M. Elho-
seiny, R. Gao, and D. Manocha, “Meerkat: Audio-visual
large language model for grounding in space and time,”
2024.
[230] Z. Xing, X. Hu, C.-W. Fu, W. Wang, J. Dai, and P.-A.
Heng, “EchoInk-R1: Exploring audio-visual reasoning
in multimodal LLMs via reinforcement learning,” arXiv
preprint arXiv:2505.04623, 2025.
[231] R. Krishna, Y. Zhu, O. Groth, J. Johnson, K. Hata,
J. Kravitz, S. Chen, Y. Kalantidis, L.-J. Li, D. A.
Shamma et al., “Visual genome: Connecting language
and vision using crowdsourced dense image annota-
tions,” International journal of computer vision, vol.
123, pp. 32–73, 2017.
[232] K. Yang, O. Russakovsky, and J. Deng, “Spatialsense:
An adversarially crowdsourced benchmark for spatial
relation recognition,” in Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF
International Conference on Computer Vision, 2019, pp.
2051–2060.
[233] J. Lei, L. Yu, T. L. Berg, and M. Bansal, “Tvqa+:
Spatio-temporal grounding for video question answer-
ing,” arXiv preprint arXiv:1904.11574, 2019.
[234] Y.-C. Su, S. Changpinyo, X. Chen, S. Thoppay, C.-J.
Hsieh, L. Shapira, R. Soricut, H. Adam, M. Brown,
M.-H. Yang et al., “2.5 d visual relationship detection,”
Computer Vision and Image Understanding, vol. 224,
p. 103557, 2022.
[235] L. Parcalabescu, M. Cafagna, L. Muradjan, A. Frank,
I. Calixto, and A. Gatt, “Valse: A task-independent
benchmark
for
vision
and
language
models
centered on linguistic phenomena,” arXiv preprint
arXiv:2112.07566, 2021.
[236] F. Liu, G. Emerson, and N. Collier, “Visual spatial
reasoning,” Transactions of the Association for Com-
putational Linguistics, vol. 11, pp. 635–651, 2023.
[237] A. Kamath, J. Hessel, and K.-W. Chang, “What’s“
up” with vision-language models? investigating their
struggle
with
spatial
reasoning,”
arXiv
preprint
arXiv:2310.19785, 2023.
[238] X. Guo, R. Zhang, Y. Duan, Y. He, C. Zhang, S. Liu,
and L. Chen, “Drivemllm: A benchmark for spatial un-
derstanding with multimodal large language models in
autonomous driving,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2411.13112,
2024.
[239] J. Wang, Y. Ming, Z. Shi, V. Vineet, X. Wang, S. Li, and
N. Joshi, “Is a picture worth a thousand words? delving
into spatial reasoning for vision language models,”
Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems,
vol. 37, pp. 75 392–75 421, 2024.
[240] N. Rajabi and J. Kosecka, “Gsr-bench: A benchmark for
grounded spatial reasoning evaluation via multimodal
llms,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2406.13246, 2024.
[241] X. Wang, W. Ma, T. Zhang, C. M. de Melo, J. Chen,
and A. Yuille, “Pulsecheck457: A diagnostic benchmark
for comprehensive spatial reasoning of large multimodal
models,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2502.08636, 2025.
[242] H. Liu, C. Li, Y. Li, and Y. J. Lee, “Improved baselines
with visual instruction tuning,” in Proceedings of the
IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern
Recognition (CVPR), June 2024, pp. 26 296–26 306.
[243] J. Achiam, S. Adler, S. Agarwal, L. Ahmad, I. Akkaya,
F. L. Aleman, D. Almeida, J. Altenschmidt, S. Alt-
man, S. Anadkat et al., “Gpt-4 technical report,” arXiv
preprint arXiv:2303.08774, 2023.
[244] X. Fu, Y. Hu, B. Li, Y. Feng, H. Wang, X. Lin,
D. Roth, N. A. Smith, W.-C. Ma, and R. Krishna,
“Blink: Multimodal large language models can see but
not perceive,” in European Conference on Computer
Vision.
Springer, 2024, pp. 148–166.
[245] W. Dai, J. Li, D. Li, A. Tiong, J. Zhao, W. Wang,
B. Li, P. N. Fung, and S. Hoi, “Instructblip: Towards
general-purpose vision-language models with instruc-
tion tuning,” Advances in neural information processing
systems, vol. 36, pp. 49 250–49 267, 2023.
[246] G. Team, R. Anil, S. Borgeaud, J.-B. Alayrac, J. Yu,
R. Soricut, J. Schalkwyk, A. M. Dai, A. Hauth, K. Mil-
lican et al., “Gemini: a family of highly capable multi-
modal models,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2312.11805, 2023.
[247] B. Li, Y. Zhang, D. Guo, R. Zhang, F. Li, H. Zhang,
K. Zhang, P. Zhang, Y. Li, Z. Liu et al., “Llava-
onevision: Easy visual task transfer,” arXiv preprint
arXiv:2408.03326, 2024.
[248] P. Wang, S. Bai, S. Tan, S. Wang, Z. Fan, J. Bai,
K. Chen, X. Liu, J. Wang, W. Ge et al., “Qwen2-
vl:
Enhancing
vision-language
model’s
perception
of
the
world
at
any
resolution,”
arXiv
preprint
arXiv:2409.12191, 2024.
[249] J. Bai, S. Bai, Y. Chu, Z. Cui, K. Dang, X. Deng, Y. Fan,
W. Ge, Y. Han, F. Huang et al., “Qwen technical report,”
arXiv preprint arXiv:2309.16609, 2023.
[250] Q. Ye, H. Xu, J. Ye, M. Yan, A. Hu, H. Liu, Q. Qian,
J. Zhang, and F. Huang, “mplug-owl2: Revolutionizing
multi-modal large language model with modality col-
laboration,” in Proceedings of the ieee/cvf conference
on computer vision and pattern recognition, 2024, pp.
13 040–13 051.
[251] G. Team, P. Georgiev, V. I. Lei, R. Burnell, L. Bai,
A. Gulati, G. Tanzer, D. Vincent, Z. Pan, S. Wang


34
et al., “Gemini 1.5: Unlocking multimodal understand-
ing across millions of tokens of context,” arXiv preprint
arXiv:2403.05530, 2024.
[252] M. Xu, M. Wu, Y. Zhao, J. C. L. Li, and W. Ou, “Llava-
spacesgg: Visual instruct tuning for open-vocabulary
scene graph generation with enhanced spatial relations,”
in 2025 IEEE/CVF Winter Conference on Applications
of Computer Vision (WACV).
IEEE, 2025, pp. 6362–
6372.
[253] Z. Wang, Y. Dong, F. Luo, M. Ruan, Z. Cheng, C. Chen,
P. Li, and Y. Liu, “How do multimodal large language
models handle complex multimodal reasoning? placing
them in an extensible escape game,” arXiv preprint
arXiv:2503.10042, 2025.
[254] C. Plizzari, A. Tonioni, Y. Xian, A. Kulshrestha, and
F. Tombari, “Omnia de egotempo: Benchmarking tem-
poral understanding of multi-modal llms in egocentric
videos,” in CVPR, 2025.
[255] Y. Li, Y. Fu, T. Qian, Q. Xu, S. Dai, D. P. Paudel,
L. Van Gool, and X. Wang, “Egocross: Benchmarking
multimodal large language models for cross-domain
egocentric video question answering,” arXiv preprint
arXiv:2508.10729, 2025.
[256] Z. Wen, Y. Wang, C. Liao, B. Yang, J. Li, W. Liu,
H. He, B. Feng, X. Liu, Y. Lyu et al., “Ai for service:
Proactive assistance with ai glasses,” arXiv preprint
arXiv:2510.14359, 2025.
[257] X. Zhang, T. Fu, and X. Zheng, “Omnidirectional
spatial modeling from correlated panoramas,” arXiv
preprint arXiv:2509.02164, 2025.
[258] C. Liao, K. Lei, X. Zheng, J. Moon, Z. Wang, Y. Wang,
D. P. Paudel, L. Van Gool, and X. Hu, “Benchmark-
ing multi-modal semantic segmentation under sensor
failures: Missing and noisy modality robustness,” in
Proceedings of the Computer Vision and Pattern Recog-
nition Conference, 2025, pp. 1576–1586.
[259] X. Zheng, Y. Lyu, J. Zhou, and L. Wang, “Centering the
value of every modality: Towards efficient and resilient
modality-agnostic semantic segmentation,” in European
Conference on Computer Vision.
Springer, 2024, pp.
192–212.
[260] X. Zheng, Y. Lyu, L. Jiang, D. P. Paudel, L. Van Gool,
and X. Hu, “Reducing unimodal bias in multi-modal
semantic segmentation with multi-scale functional en-
tropy regularization,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2505.06635,
2025.
